CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION Project Management Institute (PMI) practice standards are guides to the use of a tool, technique, or process identified in A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge ( PMBOK Guide – Fourth Edition, this practice standard does not cover risk in programs or portfolios of projects. Chapter 11 of the PMBOK Guide – Fourth Edition and textbooks, handbooks, and courses. Figure 1-1. Hierarchy of PMI Project Risk Management Resources CHAPTER 1 − INTRODUCTION This practice standard is organized in three main sections: 1. Introductory material including the framework, purpose, principles, context of, and introduction to Project Risk Management processes as defi ned in the PMBOK Guide – Fourth Edition. The six processes are as follows: Plan Risk Management, Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis, Plan Risk Responses, and Each of these six processes is described in a chapter that addresses the following four topics: ( a ) purpose and objectives of the process; ( b ) critical success factors for the process; ( c ) tools and techniques for the process; and ( d ) documenting the results of the process. 3. A glossary of terms which are used in this practice standard. This practice standard emphasizes those principles that are fundamental to effective, comprehensive, and successful Project Risk Management. These principles can and should be stated at a general level for several reasons: 1. Principles are expected to be agreed upon now and to be valid in the future. While tools and techniques are constantly evolving, the principles have more stability and persistence. 2. Different projects, organizations, and situations will require different approaches to Project Risk Management. In particular, risk management is a discipline that contains a series of processes to apply to both large and small projects. Risk management will be more effective if its practice is tailored to the project and congruent with the organizational culture, processes and assets. There are many different ways of conducting risk management that may comply with the principles of Project Risk Management as presented in this practice standard. 3. The principles are applicable to projects carried out in a global context, reﬂ ecting the many business and organizational arrangements between participants, for example, joint ventures between commercial and national companies, government and non-government organizations, and the cross-cultural environment often found on these project teams. The principles described herein can be used as a check for an organization’s processes. Practitioners can establish processes specifi c to their particular situation, project, or organization and then compare them with these principles, thus validating them against good Project Risk Management practice. CHAPTER 1 − INTRODUCTION 1.2 Project Risk Management Definition The Definition of Project Risk Management, as defi ned in the PMBOK Guide – Fourth Edition also states: “The objectives of Project Risk Management are to increase the probability and impact of positive events, and decrease the probability and impact of negative events in the project.” In the PMBOK Recognize the Value of Risk Management — Project Risk Management should be recognized as a valuable discipline that provides a positive potential return on investment for organizational management, project stakeholders (both internal and external), project management, and team members. Open and Honest Communication — Everyone should be involved in the Project Risk Management process. Any actions or attitudes that hinder communication about project risk reduce the effectiveness of Project Risk Management in terms of proactive approaches and effective decision-making. Risk Effort Scaled to Project — Project Risk Management activities should be consistent with the value of the project to the organization and with its level of project risk, its scale, and other organizational constraints. In particular, the cost of Project Risk Management should be appropriate to its potential value to the project and the organization. Guide – Fourth Edition. These principles and concepts are generally consistent with other approaches to Project Risk Management commonly used although the terminology may differ in some details. The execution of the Project Risk Management process is dealt with in subsequent chapters of this practice standard and so is not discussed here. 2.2 Definition of Project Risk The word “risk” is used in many ways in everyday language and in various specialist disciplines. Its use in the PMBOK Guide – Fourth Edition is as follows: Project risk is an uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has a positive or a negative effect on a project’s objectives. This Definition includes two key dimensions of risk: uncertainty and effect on a project’s objectives. When assessing the importance of a project risk, these two dimensions must both be considered. The uncertainty dimension may be described using the term “probability” and the effect may be called “impact” (though other descriptors are possible, such as “likelihood” and “consequence”). The Definition of risk includes both distinct events which are uncertain but can be clearly described, and more general conditions which are less specifi c but also may give risk to uncertainty. The Definition of project risk also encompasses uncertain events which could have a negative effect on a project’s objectives, as well as those which could have a positive effect. These two types of risk are called, respectively, threats and opportunities. It is important to address both threats and opportunities within a unified Project Risk Management process. This allows for the gain of synergies and effi ciencies such as addressing both in the same analyses and coordinating the responses to both if they overlap or can reinforce each other. CHAPTER 2 − PRINCIPLES AND CONCEPTS Risks are uncertain future events or conditions which may or may not occur, but which would matter if they did occur. It is important to distinguish risks from risk-related features, such as cause and effect. Causes are events or circumstances which currently exist or are certain to exist in the future and which might give rise to risks. Effects are conditional future events or conditions which would directly affect one or more project objectives if the associated risk occurs. The cause-risk-effect chain can be used in a structured risk statement or risk description to ensure that each of these three elements is properly described (see Section 5.3). When a risk event occurs, it ceases to become uncertain. Threats which occur may be called issues or problems; opportunities which occur may be called benefi ts. Both issues/problems and benefi ts entail project management actions that are outside the scope of the Project Risk Management process. 2.3 Individual Risks and Overall Project Risk It is useful to consider project risk at two levels: individual risks and overall project risk. Individual risks are specifi c events or conditions that might affect project objectives. An individual risk may positively or negatively affect one or more of the project objectives, elements, or tasks. Understanding individual risks can assist in determining how to apply effort and resources to enhance the chances of project success. Day-to-day Project Risk Management focuses on these individual risks in order to enhance the prospects of a successful project outcome. Overall project risk represents the effect of uncertainty on the project as a whole. Overall project risk is more than the sum of individual risks on a project, since it applies to the whole project rather than to individual elements or tasks. It represents the exposure of stakeholders to the implications of variations in project outcome. It is an important component of strategic decision-making, program and portfolio management, and project governance where investments are sanctioned or cancelled and priorities are set. At these higher levels, it is necessary to set realistic targets for the cost and duration of a project, establish the contingency reserve levels required to protect the project stakeholders, set appropriate project priorities, and judge whether the risk of overall success is increasing or decreasing as implementation advances. 2.4 Stakeholder Risk Attitudes The risk attitudes of the project stakeholders determine the extent to which an individual risk or overall project risk matters. A wide range of factors inﬂ uence risk attitude. These include the scale of the project within the range of stakeholders’ overall activities, the strength of public commitments made about the performance of the project, and the stakeholders’ sensitivity to issues such as environmental impacts, industrial relations, and other factors. Stakeholder risk attitudes usually result in a desire for increased certainty in project outcomes, and may express a preference for one project objective over another. How risk is regarded is usually also strongly inﬂ uenced by an organization’s culture. Different organizations are more or less open, and this often impacts the way risk management can be applied. CHAPTER 2 − PRINCIPLES AND CONCEPTS Understanding stakeholders’ attitudes toward risk is an important component of risk management planning that precedes risk identifi cation and analysis, in order to optimize both project success and stakeholder satisfaction with the project’s results. These attitudes should be identified and managed proactively and deliberately throughout the Project Risk Management process. They may differ from one project to another for the same stakeholders and will usually differ from one group of stakeholders to another. In fact a single stakeholder may adopt different risk attitudes at various stages in the same project. It is also important to understand the particular implications of stakeholder risk attitudes on projects where the team is international, cross-industry, or multi-organizational. 2.5 Iterative Process It is the nature of projects that circumstances change as they are being planned and executed. The amount of information available about risks will usually increase as time goes on. Some risks will occur while others will not, new risks will arise or be discovered, and the characteristics of those already identified may change. As a result, the Project Risk Management processes should be repeated and the corresponding plans progressively elaborated throughout the lifetime of the project. To ensure that Project Risk Management remains effective, the identifi cation and analysis of risks should be revisited periodically, the progress on risk response actions should be monitored, and the action plans adjusted accordingly. If external circumstances change signifi cantly, it may also be necessary to revisit the risk management planning process. The development of an initial risk management plan and risk assessment is the start of the process, not the end. The frequency and depth of reviews and updates will depend on the nature of the project, the volatility of the environment in which the project is being implemented, and the timing of other project management reviews and updates. 2.6 Communication Project Risk Management cannot take place in isolation. Success relies heavily on communication throughout the process. Risk identifi cation and analysis depend on comprehensive input from stakeholders in a project to ensure that nothing signifi cant is overlooked and that risks are realistically assessed. The credibility of the process and the commitment of those who should act to manage risks can be assured only if the way the process operates and the conclusions it produces are understood and seen as credible by all concerned. This demands effective and honest communication from the Project Risk Management process to the rest of the project team and other project stakeholders. Communication of the results of the Project Risk Management process should be targeted to meet the specifi c needs of each stakeholder and should be reﬂ ected within the overall project communications strategy with each stakeholder’s responsibility and role in risk management identified and agreed-upon. CHAPTER 2 − PRINCIPLES AND CONCEPTS 2.7 Responsibility for Project Risk Management It may be considered simplistic to say “risk management is everyone’s responsibility” as previously stated. However it is important that management of project risk is not left to a few risk specialists. Project Risk Management should be included as an integral part of all other project processes. Since project risks can affect project objectives, anyone with an interest in achieving those objectives should play a role in Project Risk Management. The specifi c roles depend on the project team members’ and other stakeholders’ place within the project and their relation to project objectives. Roles and responsibilities for Project Risk Management should be clearly defi ned and communicated, and individuals should be held responsible and accountable for results. This includes allocating responsibility for specifi c activities within the risk process, as well as for resulting actions required to implement agreed-upon responses. Responsibility should also be allocated for ensuring that risk-related lessons are captured for future use. 2.8 Project Manager’s Role for Project Risk Management The project manager has particular responsibilities in relation to the Project Risk Management process. The project manager has overall responsibility for delivering a successful project which fully meets the defi ned objectives. The project manager is accountable for the day-to-day management of the project, including effective risk management. The role of the project manager may include: Encouraging senior management support for Project Risk Management activities. Developing and approving the risk management plan. Facilitating open and honest communication about risk within the project team and with Approving risk responses and associated actions prior to implementation. Overseeing risk management by subcontractors and suppliers. decisions and actions to maintain acceptable risk exposure. Escalating identified risks to senior management where appropriate: such risks include any which are Auditing risk responses for their effectiveness and documenting lessons learned. Assessing the impact of proposed scope changes; Allocating resources to tasks; and None of these actions can be performed properly without a clear view of the risk involved, as determined during the Project Risk Management process. In other words, project management process effectiveness is increased by using the information and results from Project Risk Management. In addition, effective Project Risk Management requires input from other project management processes. Outputs such as the work breakdown structure (WBS), estimates, the project schedule, assumptions list, etc. are all important prerequisites for effective Project Risk Management. CHAPTER 3 − INTRODUCTION TO PROJECT RISK MANAGEMENT PROCESSES 3.2 Project Risk Management Processes The defi ned steps of Project Risk Management describe a structured approach for understanding and managing risk on a project. This chapter outlines the steps required for effective Project Risk Management. Each step is described in more detail in subsequent chapters. As previously defi ned, project risk is an uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has a positive or negative effect on a project’s objectives. From this Definition, it is clear that risks only exist in relation to objectives. It is therefore essential at the start of the Project Risk Management process to clearly defi ne the objectives. It is also clear that different projects are exposed to different levels of risk, so each step in the Project Risk Management process should be scalable to meet the varying degrees of risk. Scalable elements of the process include: Available resources, Tools and techniques used, Review and update frequency, and As a precondition for a successful Project Risk Management implementation, it is important to have a clear understanding of the risk thresholds that defi ne the key stakeholders’ views on acceptable levels of risk, as well as a framework against which identified risks can be assessed. As a result, the Project Risk Management process always starts with an initiation step. This is required in order to ensure a common understanding and agreement of the team and other stakeholders on the approach and parameters that will be applied in managing risk in this project, as well as the scope and objectives of the Project Risk Management process itself. Project Risk Management activities, resources, and attention should be appropriate to the project since different projects warrant different levels of risk management application. The main actions to provide the required tailoring are as follows: Defi ne those objectives against which risks will be identified, project, and Defi ne risk thresholds, tolerances, and the assessment framework. Plan Risk Management (Chapter 4) — Defi nes the scope and objectives of the Project Risk Management process, and ensures that the risk process is fully integrated into wider project management. Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis (Chapter 6) — Evaluates key characteristics of individual risks enabling them to be prioritized for further action. Plan Risk Responses (Chapter 8) — Determines appropriate response strategies and actions for each individual risk and for overall project risk, and integrates them into a consolidated project management plan. Project-Related Criteria. To assess the success of Project Risk Management, the stakeholders must agree on an acceptable level of results for the project-related criteria (such as cost, time, and scope). In order to ensure consistency and agreement among stakeholders, the risk management plan should present these objectives with reference to the project Definition documents. To provide guidance in risk management, particularly in prioritizing risk responses, stakeholders should also prioritize each project objective. Project description; Risk management organization; Stakeholder risk tolerance; Risk management tools and guidelines for use; Templates; Strategy; and CHAPTER 5 IDENTIFY RISKS 5.1 Purpose and Objectives of the Identify Risks Process A risk cannot be managed unless it is fi rst identified. Consequently, after risk management planning has been completed, the fi rst process in the iterative Project Risk Management process aims to identify all the knowable risks to project objectives. It is, however, impossible to identify all the risks at the outset of a project. Over time, the level of project risk exposure changes as a result of the decisions and actions taken previously in the project (internal change) and of externally imposed change. The purpose of risk identifi cation is to identify risks to the maximum extent that is practicable. The fact that some risks are unknowable or emergent requires the Identify Risk process to be iterative, repeating the Identify Risks process to fi nd new risks which have become knowable since the previous iteration of the process. When a risk is fi rst identified, potential responses may also be identified at the same time. These should be recorded during the Identify Risks process and considered for immediate action if such action is appropriate. Where such responses are not implemented immediately, these should be considered during the Plan Risk Responses process. 5.2 Critical Success Factors for the Identify Risks Process The practices described in Sections 5.2.1 through 5.2.10 will maximize the value and effectiveness of the Identify Risks process and enhance the likelihood of identifying as many risks as practicable. 5.2.1 Early Identifi cation Risk identifi cation should be performed as early as possible in the project lifecycle, recognizing the paradox that uncertainty is high in the initial stages of a project so there is often less information on which to base the risk identifi cation. Early risk identifi cation enables key project decisions to take maximum account of risks inherent in the project, and may result in changes to the project strategy. It also maximizes the time available for development and implementation of risk responses, which enhances effi ciency since responses taken early are often normally less costly than later ones. CHAPTER 5 − IDENTIFY RISKS 5.2.2 Iterative Identifi cation Since not all risks can be identified at any given point in the project, it is essential that risk identifi cation is repeated throughout the project life cycle. This should be done periodically, at a frequency determined during the Plan Risk Management process. Risk identifi cation might also be repeated at key milestones in the project, or whenever there is signifi cant change to the project or its operating environment. 5.2.3 Emergent Identifi cation In addition to invoking the Identify Risks process as defi ned in the project plan, the Project Risk Management process should permit risks to be identified at any time, not limited to formal risk identifi cation events or regular reviews. 5.2.4 Comprehensive Identifi cation A broad range of sources of risk should be considered to ensure that as many uncertainties as possible that might affect objectives have been identified. 5.2.5 Explicit Identifi cation of Opportunities The Identify Risks process should ensure opportunities are properly considered. 5.2.6 Multiple Perspectives The Identify Risks process should take input from a broad range of project stakeholders to ensure that all perspectives are represented and considered. Limiting risk identifi cation to the immediate project team is unlikely to expose all knowable risks. 5.2.7 Risks Linked to Project Objectives Each identified project risk should relate to at least one project objective (time, cost, quality, scope, etc.), noting that the PMBOK Urgency (proximity). Risks requiring near term responses may be considered more urgent to address. Indicators of urgency can include the lead time necessary to execute a risk response and the clarity of symptoms and warning signs (also known as detectability) that may trigger the response. Manageability. A risk may increase in importance if it affects the enterprise beyond the project. 6.2.2 Use Agreed-Upon Definitions of Risk Terms The risk assessment should be based on agreed-upon Definitions of important terms, and those Definitions should be used consistently when assessing each risk. The use of Definitions, for example, of levels of probability and of impact on objectives, assists the providers of the information in giving realistic assessments for each risk, and facilitates the communication of the results to management and other stakeholders. CHAPTER 6 − PERFORM QUALITATIVE RISK ANALYSIS 6.2.3 Collect High-Quality Information about Risks Collection of high-quality information about risks is required. Often this information is not available in any historic database and should be gathered by interviews, workshops, and other means using expert judgment. Data gathered from individuals may be subject to reporting or intentional bias. When this occurs, the bias should be identified and remedied where possible, or a different, unbiased source of information should be found and used. 6.2.4 Perform Iterative Qualitative Risk Analysis The success of qualitative risk analysis is enhanced if the process is used periodically throughout the project. It is impossible to know in advance all the risks that may occur in a project, therefore the Identify Risks and Perform Qualitative Analysis processes should be repeated periodically for individual risks. The frequency of this effort will be planned in the Plan Risk Management process, but may also depend on events within the project itself. 6.3 Tools and Techniques for the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis Process The tools and techniques used for assessing individual risks will identify the risks that are important to the project’s success. This process is illustrated in Figure 6-2. Figure 6-2. The Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis Process CHAPTER 6 − PERFORM QUALITATIVE RISK ANALYSIS 6.3.1 Select Risk Characteristics that Defi ne Risks’ Importance Qualitative risk analysis tools provide ways to distinguish those risks that are important for response or further analysis from those that are less important. The criteria that make a risk of interest to management are agreed upon in advance and implemented in the tools used. Output from qualitative risk analysis tools includes a listing of risks in priority order or in priority groups (e.g., high, moderate, and low). The tools for qualitative risk analysis allow the organization or project stakeholders to specify those levels or combinations of risk characteristics that make a particular risk of interest to management. Most tools assess a risk’s importance from a combination of probability of occurrence and degree of impact on objectives. 6.3.2 Collect and Analyze Data Assessment of individual risks is based on information collected about them. Therefore, data collection and evaluation tools, including interviews, workshops, and references to databases of prior projects, require management support and attention. It is important to protect against bias in data gathering, which is important when relying on expert judgment for the information. 6.3.3 Prioritize Risks by Probability and Impact on Specifi c Objectives Some tools permit distinguishing a risk’s priority in terms of the affected objective. This capability provides a list of risks that are important for any specifi c objective of interest to management. This is useful since it is common for risks to have uneven impacts on various project objectives. 6.3.4 Prioritize Risks by Probability and Impact on Overall Project There are reasons for constructing a measure of a specifi c risk’s importance to the entire project as contrasted with its importance to specifi c objectives. A common reason is for ease of communication with management and other stakeholders. When a single risk prioritization index is needed, the organization should be explicit about how that index is created. Usually the index reﬂ ects the organization’s preference among objectives. The technique for creating the overall risk priority measure should be documented in the Plan Risk Management process. CHAPTER 6 − PERFORM QUALITATIVE RISK ANALYSIS 6.3.5 Categorize Risk Causes Categorizing risks appropriately may lead to improved analysis of the probability and magnitude of project risk and to effective responses. Understanding the relationships between risks may provide a better understanding of the possibility and magnitude of project risk than if risks are only considered as separate and independent events. Identifying common root causes of a group of risks, for instance, may reveal both the magnitude of the risk event for the group as a whole along with effective strategies that might address several risks simultaneously. Alternatively, some risks may be linked with others in a causal chain, and understanding the chain of risks may lead to a better understanding of the implication of risk for the project. Identifying risks that can occur at the same time or using the same resources for recovery might provide a realistic picture of problems of risk mitigation using scarce resources. Combining the results of the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process with the risk breakdown structure (see Identify Risks, Chapter 5) can show clusters of priority risks arising from specifi c sources. A combination of the risk analysis information with the work breakdown structure (WBS) can show which areas of the project exhibit the most risk. Assessing the high-priority risks’ impact on one objective, such as the schedule, may indicate which activities to address to reduce that objective’s uncertainty. All of these approaches can contribute to the realism and usefulness of the qualitative risk analysis. 6.3.6 Document the Results of the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis Process The Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process adds structure to the list of undifferentiated risks (see Identify Risks, Chapter 5) into categories of priority. Priorities are usually based on the risk’s probability of occurring and its potential impact on specifi c project objectives or on the whole project. Each identified risk is assigned a priority, perhaps by objective or for the entire project. This information is usually stored in the risk register which is easy to use and update with new information. The risk register list of prioritized risks is posted to the project participants who are responsible for further analysis or action to improve the project plan. Risks that are judged to have high priority are segregated for further analysis and response planning and are generally monitored frequently. Risks of low priority to the project may be placed on a watch list and are reviewed less often for changes in their status. CHAPTER 7 PERFORM QUANTITATIVE RISK ANALYSIS 7.1 Purpose and Objectives of the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis Process The Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process provides a numerical estimate of the overall effect of risk on the objectives of the project, based on current plans and information, when considering risks simultaneously. Results from this type of analysis can be used to evaluate the likelihood of success in achieving project objectives and to estimate contingency reserves, usually for time and cost that are appropriate to both the risks and the risk tolerance of project stakeholders. It is generally accepted that analyzing uncertainty in the project using quantitative techniques such as Monte Carlo simulation may provide more realism in the estimate of the overall project cost or schedule than a non-probabilistic approach which assumes that the activity durations or line-item cost estimates are deterministic. However it should be recognized that quantitative risk analysis is not always required or appropriate for all projects. For example, qualitative risk analysis may provide enough information for development of effective risk responses, especially for smaller projects. Therefore, during the Plan Risk Management process, the benefi ts of quantitative risk analysis should be weighed against the effort required to ensure that the additional insights and value justify the additional effort. Partial risk analyses, such as qualitative risk analysis, aim at prioritizing individual risks viewed one at a time and therefore cannot produce measures of overall project risk when all risks are considered simultaneously. Calculating estimates of overall project risk is the focus of the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process. Specifi c project risks are usually best understood and quantified at a detailed level such as the line-item cost or schedule activity level. By contrast, project objectives such as achievement of the project’s budget or the schedule are specified at a higher level, often at the level of the total project. An overall risk analysis, such as one that uses quantitative techniques, estimates the implication of all quantified risks on project objectives. The implementation of overall risk analysis using quantitative methods requires: Complete and accurate representation of the project objectives built up from individual project level of detail that lends itself to specifi c assessment of individual risks. Including generic risks that have a broader effect than individual project elements. multiple risks simultaneously in determining overall impact on the overall project objective. CHAPTER 7 − PERFORM QUANTITATIVE RISK ANALYSIS Results of the quantitative analysis will be compared to the project plan (baseline or current) to give management an estimate of the overall project risk and will answer important questions such as: What is the probability of meeting the project’s objectives? provide the organization with the level of certainty it requires based upon its risk tolerance? What are those parts of the project, such as line-item costs or schedule activities, which contribute Estimating overall project risk using quantitative methods helps distinguish those projects where quantified risks threaten objectives beyond the tolerance of the stakeholders, from those for which the objectives are within acceptable tolerances even when risk is considered. The former may be targeted for vigorous risk responses aimed at protecting those objectives most important to the stakeholders. A high-level comparison of quantitative and qualitative risk analysis processes is presented in Figure 7-1. Figure 7-1. Comparison of Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches 7.2 Critical Success Factors for the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis Process Success in achieving the objectives of quantitative risk analysis depends explicitly on at least the factors described in Sections 7.2.1 through 7.2.6. CHAPTER 7 − PERFORM QUANTITATIVE RISK ANALYSIS 7.2.1 Prior Risk Identifi cation and Qualitative Risk Analysis The Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process occurs after the Identify Risks and Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis processes have been completed. Reference to a prioritized list of identified risks ensures that the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process will consider all significant risks when analyzing their effects quantitatively. 7.2.2 Appropriate Project Model An appropriate model of the project should be used as the basis for quantitative risk analysis. Project models most frequently used in quantitative risk analysis include the project schedule (for time), line-item cost estimates (for cost), decision tree (for decisions in the face of uncertainty) and other total-project models. Quantitative risk analysis is especially sensitive to the completeness and correctness of the model of the project that is used. 7.2.3 Commitment to Collecting High-Quality Risk Data Often high-quality data about risks are not available in any historic database and should be gathered by interviews, workshops, and other means using expert judgment of those present. Collection of risk data requires resources and time as well as management support. 7.2.4 Unbiased Data Success in gathering risk analysis data requires the ability to recognize when biases occur and combating that bias or developing other unbiased sources of the data. Bias in risk data can occur for many reasons, but two common sources of bias are cognitive bias and motivational bias. 7.2.5 Overall Project Risk Derived from Individual Risks The Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process is based upon a methodology that correctly derives the overall project risk from the individual risks. In risk analysis of cost and schedule, for example, an appropriate method is Monte Carlo simulation. A decision tree is an appropriate method for making decisions when future events are not certain, using the probability and impact of all risks, and combining their effect to derive an overall project measure such as value or cost. In each of these methods, the risks are specified at the level of the detailed tasks or line-item costs and incorporated into the model of the project to calculate effects on objectives such as schedule or cost for the entire project, by combining those risks. CHAPTER 7 − PERFORM QUANTITATIVE RISK ANALYSIS 7.2.6 Interrelationships Between Risks in Quantitative Risk Analysis Attention should be given to the possibility that the individual risks in the project model are related to each other. For example, several risks may have a common root cause and therefore are likely to occur together. This possibility is sometimes addressed by correlating the risks that are related, ensuring that they generally occur together during the analysis. Another common way to represent the risks which occur together is by using the risk register listing of the risk or root cause and attaching it to several project elements such as schedule activities or cost elements. When a particular risk occurs, the affected elements will all experience the effect of that risk together. 7.3 Tools and Techniques for the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis Process Tools and techniques used appropriately for quantitative risk analysis have several characteristics, as follows: 7.3.1 Comprehensive Risk Representation Risk models permit representation of many, if not all, of the risks that have impact on an objective simultaneously. They also permit the representation of both opportunities and threats to the project’s objectives. 7.3.2 Risk Impact Calculation Quantitative models facilitate the correct calculation of the effect of many risks, which are typically identified and quantified at a level of detail below the total project, on the project objectives, which are typically described at the level of the total project. 7.3.3 Quantitative Method Appropriate to Analyzing Uncertainty Probability models use a quantitative method that addresses uncertainty. Specifi cally, the methods should be able to handle the way uncertainty is represented, predominantly as probability of an event’s occurring or as probability distributions for a range of outcomes. A good example of this is the use of Monte Carlo simulation tools that permit the combination of probability distributions of line-item costs or schedule activity durations, many of which are uncertain. 7.3.4 Data Gathering Tools Data gathering tools used in this process include assessment of historical data and workshops, interviews, or questionnaires to gather quantified information—for example, on the probability of a risk occurring, a probability distribution of its potential impacts on cost or time, or relationships such as correlation between risks. CHAPTER 7 − PERFORM QUANTITATIVE RISK ANALYSIS 7.3.5 Effective Presentation of Quantitative Analysis Results Results from the quantitative tools are generally not available in standard deterministic project management methods such as project scheduling or cost estimating. Examples of these are the probability distribution of project completion dates or total costs and the expected value of a project decision. These results, when all risks are considered simultaneously, include the following: Probability of achieving a project objective such as fi nishing on time or within budget. confidence. Identity or location within the project model of the most important risks. An example of this is a Project planning, budgeting, and scheduling; Project communication planning. Technical feasibility; actions; and Balance between overall impact of the response on the project objectives and the improvement in Set up a business structure in which the customer and the supplier share the risk. project priority, resource allocations, delivery calendar, etc. Pursue the project despite a risk exposure that exceeds the desired level. Decision-support tools for determining the optimal potential response. Tools to transfer control to the Monitor and Control Risks process. Need to analyze a complex change request, Project re-planning or major plan elaboration, and In the event of major organizational changes, risk management planning may need to be revisited prior to reassessing the risks. In addition to the regular status reviews, periodic audits should be performed to determine strengths and weaknesses in handling risks within the project. This should entail identifying any barriers to effectiveness or keys to success in risk management, recognition of which could lead to improvements in risk management of the current or future projects. At the end of the project, an integrated analysis of the risk management process should be carried out with a focus on long-term process improvements. This analysis consolidates the fi ndings of the periodic audits to identify lessons that would be applicable in general to a large proportion of the organization’s projects in the future, such as appropriate levels of resources, adequate time for the analysis, use of tools, level of detail, etc. At project closure, the project manager should ensure that a description has been given of the closure of every risk in the risk register, for example: (a) did not occur; (b) occurred and contingency plan invoked; or (c) occurred and impact to the project scope (i.e., time, cost, and quality). The output of the audit of the risk management process should be consolidated with specifi c information with respect to the project’s experience of risks, and any generally applicable guidelines for the organization should be highlighted and potential actions proposed for applying them. This can lead to an update to the corresponding organizational process assets. An overview of the steps involved in the Monitor and Control Risks process is given in Figure 9-1. CHAPTER 9 − MONITOR AND CONTROL RISKS Figure 9-1. Schematic Representation of the Monitor and Control Risks Process 9.2 Critical Success Factors for the Monitor and Control Risks Process Critical success factors relate to maintaining risk awareness throughout the project and include the characteristics and capabilities detailed in Sections 9.2.1 through 9.2.3. 9.2.1 Integrate Risk Monitoring and Control with Project Monitoring and Control From the start, the project management plan should include the actions required to monitor and control project risk. This should be set up early in the project planning cycle, and then adjusted in view of the risk response planning decisions adding, for example, the actions associated with monitoring specifi c conditions or metrics. Once risk response planning has been carried out, the project schedule should include all of the agreed-upon, response-related actions so that they can be carried out as a normal part of project execution and tracked accordingly. CHAPTER 9 − MONITOR AND CONTROL RISKS 9.2.2 Continuously Monitor Risk Trigger Conditions Risk response planning will have defi ned a set of actions to be carried out as part of the project schedule as well as actions whose execution is dependent on a predefi ned trigger condition. Checking for specifi cally defi ned risks that may trigger conditional responses is the responsibility of the risk action owner, in close collaboration with the risk owner under the overall authority of the project manager. 9.2.3 Maintain Risk Awareness Risk management reports should be a regular item on every status meeting agenda to ensure that all team members remain aware of the importance of risk management and to ensure that it is fully integrated into all of the project management decisions. The project’s senior-level sponsor should require regular reports on the risks and the planned responses to ensure that stakeholders are aware of the importance of keeping a focus on risk. Sponsor feedback also motivates the project team by demonstrating senior-level interest in Project Risk Management. Stakeholders’ perception of the effectiveness of risk management is conditioned in part by the way in which risks are handled as they occur, and by the number or characteristics of such events. It is therefore crucial, whenever a risk occurs, that information about the event, as well as the progress and effectiveness of the responses, be communicated at regular intervals and in an honest manner adapted to the needs of each stakeholder. This should be supported by a well-executed communications plan. 9.3 Tools and Techniques for the Monitor and Control Risks Process In addition to standard project management monitoring and control capabilities, risk monitoring and controlling requires a focus on the tools which will support its key success factors for tracking overall risk as well as individual risks. 9.3.1 Managing Contingency Reserves Reserves may have been allocated separately to cover time-related and cost-related risks. Techniques are required that allow the project manager to assess at any point in the project whether these provide the required level of confidence in the success of the project. Tools for managing time buffers should be closely integrated into the project’s scheduling techniques, whereas those for managing cost should be compatible with the fi nancial practices. Tools are required to identify trends and forecast future outcomes to determine whether the reserves will remain suffi cient. Tools are also required for tracking progress and spending in a consolidated manner. CHAPTER 9 − MONITOR AND CONTROL RISKS 9.3.2 Tracking Trigger Conditions Trigger conditions and the corresponding metrics are defi ned during the Plan Risk Responses process. Tools are required to evaluate and track these conditions against the project baseline or specified thresholds, based on actual status. They can be chosen to provide information on risks related to the deliverables, such as performance, as well as on project-related features, such as time and cost. 9.3.3 Tracking Overall Risk Tools are required in order to determine, as the project progresses, whether the responses are having the expected effect on the project’s overall level of risk. 9.3.4 Tracking Compliance In order to monitor the quality of the execution of the risk-related plans and processes, a set of quality metrics such as degree of variation from the baseline, should be tracked and recorded. These metrics will normally have been defi ned in the risk management plan. 9.4 Documenting the Results of the Monitor and Control Risks Process The fi nal control action of risk monitoring and controlling is to record actual data for future use. This includes all of the relevant information relating to risk management from start to fi nish of the project. The Definition of what this information must include, as well as the storage mechanism, should have been previously specified in the risk management plan. The goal is to ensure that the signifi cant risk management information is recorded to provide concrete data to the lessons learned process for inclusion in a lessons learned document, report, or other communication vehicle. Typical information includes the following: For each identified risk or type of risk, whether it occurred, and, if so, when and how often. All Effectiveness of transfer and sharing actions. Effectiveness of risk mitigation and enhancement actions. Consolidated information should be provided on the level of effort expended. Costs and benefi ts to the project of risk management activities should also be provided. This information will need to be archived and indexed in a manner that will facilitate retrieval for easy review during the project, at closure, and for future projects, when the need arises. A APPENDIX A GUIDELINES FOR A PMI PRACTICE STANDARD A.1 Introduction A PMI practice standard is characterized as follows: Each practice standard provides guidelines on the mechanics (e.g., nuts and bolts, basics, individual practice standard may be applicable to the completion of one or more phases within a project. A practice standard does not necessarily mirror the Knowledge Areas within Guide –Fourth Edition), although an individual practice standard will provide suffi cient detail and background for one or more of the inputs, tools and techniques, and/or outputs. Therefore, practice standards are not required to use the name of any Knowledge Area. Each practice standard should include information on what the signifi cant process is and does, most of the time within the project management community. Processes that are generally restricted or applicable to one industry, country, or companion profession (i.e., an application area ) may be included as an appendix for informational purposes, rather than as part of the practice standard. With strong support and evidence, an application area-specifi c process may be considered as an extension practice standard, in the same manner as extensions to the PMBOK example or template includes a discussion of its strengths and weaknesses. A background description may be necessary to put this discussion in the appropriate context. The examples should be aligned with the relevant information in the standard or its appendix and placed in proximity to that information. All practice standards shall be written in the same general style and format. Each practice standard will be consistent with the Guide –Fourth Edition. Each practice standard is intended to be more prescriptive than the Guide –Fourth Edition. B APPENDIX B EVOLUTION OF PMI’S PRACTICE STANDARD FOR PROJECT RISK MANAGEMENT B.1 Pre-Project In early 2005, PMI began exploration for developing the fi rst Practice Standard for Project Risk Management. Focus would be placed on single project risk management for a single project rather than including programs or portfolios of projects, with close coupling to the Project Risk Management section of A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK relevant, and generally recognized as good practice on most projects most of the time. Is consistent with the Guide – Third Edition, expanding but not contradicting, the concepts and techniques related to Project Risk Management, and keeps within the limits and practices of Project Risk Management as described within Chapter 11 of the PMBOK Project Team. Is written for project management practitioners and other stakeholders of the project management Includes in an appendix, examples and templates of specifi c Project Risk Management processes, PMBOK Is aligned with and does not contradict other PMI standards. languages, and is sensitive to cultural issues. B APPENDIX B Can be approved as a PMI standard, which means that in addition to the content being acceptable, Guide – Fourth Edition was commissioned. As a result, the charter of the Practice Standard for Project Risk Management was expanded to be consistent and non-contradictory with that standard. B.4 Exposure and Consensus The standard was submitted as an exposure draft in the winter of 2007, and exposed on 23 March 2008. There were 849 comments. The team’s comment acceptance rate (comments accepted outright, and accepted with modifi cations) was 57%. The PMI Standards Manager submitted the resultant fi nal draft, with the concurrence of the PMI Standards Program MAG, to the PMI Standards Program Consensus Body for offi cial ballot on 27 March 2009 . Twenty-eight members of the PMI Standards Program Consensus Body agreed to participate in the ballot of the Practice Standard for Project Risk Management. Those not participating included the PM and Deputy PM for this standard because their participation was considered a conﬂ ict of interest. The balloting period was closed on 25 April 2009 with 23 ballots returned. Consensus Body voting results were as follows: 22 affi rmative and 1 affi rmative with comment. The affi rmative with comment pertained to future revisions of the standard and possible improvements to the comment adjudication process. APPENDIX C CONTRIBUTORS AND REVIEWERS OF THE PRACTICE STANDARD FOR PROJECT RISK MANAGEMENT This appendix lists, alphabetically within groupings, those individuals who have contributed to the development and production of the Practice Standard for Project Risk Management . No simple list or even multiple lists can adequately convey all the contributions of those who have volunteered to develop the Practice Standard for Project Risk Management . The Project Management Institute is grateful to all of these individuals for their support and acknowledges their contributions to the project management profession. C.1 Practice Standard for Project Risk Management Project Core Team The following individuals served as members, were contributors of text or concepts, and served as leaders within the Project Core Team (PCT): Cynthia Ann Berg, PhD, PMP Project Manager David T. Hulett, PhD, Deputy Project Manager Dr. David Hillson FRSA, FIRM Kristine Persun, MA, PMP Crispin “Kik” Piney, BSc, PMP Kristin L. Vitello, Standards Project Specialist Nan Wolfslayer, AStd, Standards Compliance Specialist C.2 Signifi cant Contributors In addition to the members of the Project Core Team and the Sub-Team Leaders, the following individuals provided signifi cant input or concepts: Jeannette Horne APPENDIX C C.3 Practice Standard for Project Risk Management Team Members In addition to those listed above, the following individuals participated on the Practice Standard for Project Risk Management Project Team. Ahmad Khairiri Abdul Ghani, PE, MBA Archie Addo, PMP, PhD Priumvada Agarwal, PMP Upinder Aggarwal, PMP Asif M Ahmad, PMP Amr Nabil Ahmed, PMP, MSc Jose Correia Alberto, MEng, CITP Salvador Alvarez, PMP Chukwudi Anakudo, PMP Ananthalakshmi Anbuselvan Jagathnarayanan Angyan, FIE, CE Rodrigo Ariza Pedro Carlos Auler Michael Avery Sai Swaminathan Baba Subramanyan, BE, PMP Teddy Alton Barnes Gail Ellen Bartz David Benfell Paul S. Bennett Douglas A. Berry, PMP Mamoun Besaiso, CE Timothy Birus Dave M. Bond Kiron Bondale Blaine W. Boxwell, MBA, PMP Carlos Eduardo M. F. Braga, PMP Valerie Claire Brasse, PMP Joan Browne, BSc, PMP Adrian Busch, PMP, MBA John J. Byrne, DBA, PMP C. S. Rajan, PMP Eduardo Cadena Franco Caron William G. Chadick, DM, PMP Souray Chakraborty Harshavardhan Chakravarti, BS Shanthi Chandrasekar Noman Zafar Chaudry, PE, PMP Vijay Chauhan, MBA, PMP Subrahmanyam Chinta, VN, PMP Carolyn Chomik Joan F. Church Glenda Clark Lorri Cline, MBA, PMP John D. Corless, PhD Anthony R. Corridore, PMP Coughlin, Philip Nancy A Cygan, MS, PMP Marco Aurélio Danelon, PMP Karel de Bakker, MA, PMP Thijs De Jong Alfredo Del Cano Peter B. de Zouza Mello, SPS, PMP Cheryl L. Dennis Raveesh Dewan, PMP, MBA Ricardo Jose do Rego Barros, PMP John David Driessnack Matt Dubois Jason Eddinger, PMP Maliha Elahi, MSc, PMP Norman Epstein, PMP, MBA Joel Erickson Rodrigo Fernandes Espirito Santo Giovanni Fanduiz Geneviève Faragó, PMP Mario Fiallo Carranco Leslie Fiedler Eduardo Fleischer APPENDIX C Kirby Fortenberry, PMP Lynn Francis Michelle L. Franklin, PMP Tracy Fritz Andrew Fry, CMA, PMP Kamlesh Gandhi, PMP, PQs Nélio Gaspar, MSc, PMP Tina Gilrein, PMP, MPM Silvio Hernan Giraldo, PMP, CBCP Vikram Godboley Vivek Goel, PMP Francisco Gomez Serge Goncharov, PMP, PgMP Ronald R.Goodwin, PMP Priyesh Gopalakrishnan Robert Grant Steve Grunewald Denise M. Guerin Sanjay Gupta, PMP Cristine Gusmão, PhD Heidi Ann Hahn, PhD, PMP Laurie Hall Robert W. Harding, PMP Balasubramaniam Hari Gopal, FCA, PMP Chandrashekar Hassan Henry Hattenrath David A. Haugh, PMP John Hendricks, MS, PMP Arnold A. Hill, PMP Rosemarie A. Hilt, MBA, PMP George Hopman, PhD, PE Sean Hugo John Humphrey Walter Hussey, PMP George Jackelen Ramona Jackson Dhanojkumar Jadhav Ayo Jemiri, MS, PMP Stephen Michael Johns Kenneth E. Johnson, MBA, PMP Valeri Jonas, BA (Honours), Oxon Roy Joslin Krishna Kallapur, PMP Rita Kaul Mariya Kehoe Rameshchandra B. Ketharaju Amir Ahmed Kheir Behrad Kiafar Konstantinos Kirytopoulos, PhD, PMP Ilkka Koskinen, MSc, PMP Alejandro Kowiendl R.V. Krishna, MBA, CAPM Jeyakumar Krishamoorthy Lars Kruse Polisetty Veera Subrahmanya Kumar, CISSP, CISA Sasi Kumar, PMP Vijaya Kurada Elise Labre David Larson Wei Lee, PMP Henry Lie Guilherme Pereira Lima, PMP Bernard Lindekens Renato Lourenço da Silva, MBA, PMP Vasantha R Manda, PMP, CISSP Edmond Matevosian, PE, PMP Rivalino Matias Jr., PhD, MSc Peña Torres Nestor Mauricio, PMP JME Maxwell MBA, PMP Alvis McGinty Traci L. McIntosh, PMP Ramesh Menon Concepcion Merino Philip Mileham APPENDIX C Waqar Ahmed Mirza Shipra Mitra Siddique Mohammed Guillermo Molina Leon Sergio Monaco, MCTS Elizabeth Mejia Montanez Flavio Montenegro, PMP Mohammad Moradi Linda L. Morgan, MSIS, PMP Rick A. Morris, MPM, PMP Tania Morris MPM, PMP Saradhi Motamarri, MTech, PMP Mark A. Munster PMP, CISA Ronan J. Murphy, CEng, MBA Carlo Muzzarelli Linda Nedney, PMP Rob Nelson, PMP Vaman G. Nene Ann Nguyen, PMP Naema Nunnery Jillian O’Connell, MBA, PMP Daryl K. Ono Armin Oppitz, PMP Daniel Pacholski, PMP Abhimanyu Parasher, MBA, PMP David M. Patrick Scott Patton Mridul Paul Chris Payne, PMP Sameer K Penakalapati, ME, PMP Alexandre Perali Sharon D. Perez-Suarez Lavinia Petcu, CAPM Bruce Petro, PMP Krista Lynn Pizzurro Roberto Pons, PMP Carl Pro Julie R. Purcell, PMP, MCSE Sridhar R Pydah, MS, PMP Vijaya Raman, PMP Stephen F. Randolph, PMBA PMP Jennifer Read, PMP, CMC Caroline Robison, PMP Fabiano Rollim, PMP, PgMP Edward Rowe Don Ruchkall Joseph Sabatini Fawzia Salahuddin MCS, PMP Salem Mahaboob Saliha Sherriff, MBA, PMP Sivakumar Sanyasi Rudolf Schenker Marcio Schmidt, PMP Bill Schneider Michael J. Scott, PMP Ravi Shanker, MBA, PMP Viresh C Shah, MBA, PMP Jeff Shore Evandro Silva Maria Isabel Silva Sumano, MBA, PMP Michael D. Simants Vivek Sivakumar, CAPM Kathy J. Slater, PMP Shaun Smith Linda E. Solorzano, BS, PMP Mauro Sotille, PMP Mandayam Sriram, Meng, PMP Tournis Stamatis, PhD PMP Fred Stein Roeland Stellingwerff Jim Stewart, PMP Prasanna V Sugavanam, PMP Ramakrishnan Sundararaman Matthias Svane, MSc, PMP Amin Tabatabayi, MBA, PMP APPENDIX C Venerando Tangco, PMP, CSM Suresh Kumar Tata, PMP, ACS Patel Tejesh, PMP Sarma Tekumalla, PMP, MBA Jacqueline Teo Michelle Tessier Gangesh Thakur, CPIM, PMP Vadivelu Thanicachalam Ing. Biagio Tramontana, PMP Subhash B. Tuladhar, PMP Ruth H. Vandegrift Sri Pavan Vardan Vemu Christoph Verschuere, Ir, PMP, CISM Marianne Viegas Yiannis Vithynos, PMP, MSc Steve Waddell Paul Waits Jr., PMP, CPM Kuan-Hsun Wang, PMP Nancy Watanabe James Wattnem Lisa L. Winchester, PMP Karen L. Woodruff, RN CFNP, PMP James Yang, PMP, MBA Luay M. Zakaria, PMP Xiaojun Zhou C.4 Final Exposure Draft Reviewers and Contributors In addition to team members, the following individuals provided recommendations for improving the Exposure Draft of the Practice Standard for Project Risk Management : Marcos Abreu Billa S. Dahaby, MS, ISSI José R. Alcalá G., PMP Gwendolyn Darby Mohd Al-Kuwari Anirban Das, M.Tech, PMP Ondiappan Arivazhagan “Ari”, PMP, PMI-RMP Terrell G. Dorn, PE Randall Ash, PMP Peggy Drew, MBA, PMP Imad Babbili Norberto Figuerola, PMP Ernest Baker, PMP Robert A. Dudley, PMP, PMI-SP Jerry Ball, PMP Scott D. Freauf, PMP, IPMA-D Eng. Dimah M. Barakat, PMP, PMI-RMP Mark Gabel, MSCE, PE Suvransu Basu, BE Oliver D. Gildersleeve, Jr., PMP, MCTS Susanne Bode Kurt J. Harris, PMP David J. Boschma PMP B.E. Jame Healy Sergio A. Calvo Abarca, PMP Walter Hekala, CQA, PMP Marlene Carnevali Shirley Hinton, PMP Bruce C. Chadbourne, PMP, PgMP Felicia Elizabeth Hong, PMP, MBA Steve Charters MAPM MSc Manuel Huerta Tomio Chiba, PMP Kristian Hurt Patricia Cohen Christoph Werner Jacobi Wendra Collet, MPM Ashok Jain, PMP, ITIL APPENDIX C Syed Asad Jawed C.C.E Dirk Pons Ramesh D. Kandadai, member RSIG Carl L. Pritchard, PMP, PMI-RMP Kenneth P. Katz PMP Javier Pumar, PMP Rameshchandra Ketharaju Polisetty Veera Subrahmanya Kumar, PMP, PMI-RMP Gene G. Kuki, PMP Chandrasekar Ramakrishnan PMP, CSQA Abhilash T. Kuzhikat, PMP, ITIL Ivan D. Ramirez R., PMP Peter Lierni Alexander Revin, PMP Christopher E. Maddox, PMP Pedro C. Ribeiro, MBA, PMP Anthony Mampilly, PMP, COP Bruce P. Robison Srinivas Mandgi, PMP, SAP HR Sadegh Roozbehi Ammar W. Mango, PgMP, PMP Tarun Kumar Roy Larry Marks Balaji Selvaraju Andrew McGlade, PMP Hilary Shreter, MBA, PMP Patrick K. Morrow, PMP Fay Simcock MSc, PMP Rajesh Musaliyath Rebecca Spohn, PMP, CQE Eric M. Myers, PMP Pranay Srivastava, PMP, CSM Mustapha NAFAÂ, MPM, PMP Joyce Statz, PhD, PMP Patrick O’Farrell, PMP, MBA Massimo Torre, PhD, PMP Lambert I. Ofoegbu, PMP, PMI-RMP Fredrick G. Trussell, PMP Kazuhiko Okubo, PMP, PE Frederick Trussell Karthikeyan Ovuraj Kevin R. Wegryn, PMP, CPM Nancy Perosio, PMP William. E. Wencel, PMP Rafael Piña Quintal Alexey D. Zimin, PME C.5 PMI Standards Member Advisory Group (MAG) The following individuals served as members of the PMI Standards Member Advisory Group (MAG) during development of the Practice Standard for Project Risk Management : Julia M. Bednar, PMP Chris Cartwright, MPM, PMP Douglas Clark Terry Cooke-Davies, PhD FCMI Carol Holliday, MA, PMP Deborah O’Bray, CIM (Hons) Asbjørn Rolstadås, PhD, Ing David W. Ross, PMP, PgMP Paul E. Shaltry, PMP David Violette, MPM, PMP John Zlockie, MBA, PMP APPENDIX C C.6 Staff Contributors Special mention is due to the following employees of PMI: Steven L. Fahrenkrog, PMP, VP Regional Development Amanda Freitick, Standards Program Administrator Ruth Anne Guerrero, MBA, PMP, Former Standards Manager Donn Greenberg, Manager, Publications Roberta Storer, Product Editor Barbara Walsh, CAPM, Publications Planner APPENDIX D TOOLS, TECHNIQUES AND TEMPLATES FOR PROJECT RISK MANAGEMENT Many tools and techniques have been developed and are in widespread use to support the Project Risk Management processes. The most commonly used of these are listed in the following tables along with their strengths, weaknesses, and critical success factors. Where a technique can be used in more than one Project Risk Management process, it is described in detail in the section associated with the main process that it supports, and referred to as necessary for other processes to which it can be of use. Examples and templates shown after each table provide illustrations of the most common and good practice uses of these tools and techniques. This information is not intended to explain the tools and techniques but to list them with certain important characteristics. Those who are interested in learning more are encouraged to seek other sources such as handbooks, textbooks, or courses in project risk management. D.1 Techniques, Examples and Templates for Risk Management Planning (Chapter 4) Plan Risk Management defi nes the approach to be followed for managing the risks throughout the lifespan of the corresponding project. D.1.1 Techniques An example of an approach is given in Table D1. Table D1. Example of Plan Risk Management Approach Technique Strengths Weaknesses CSFs for Effective Application Planning Meetings and Analysis Involvement of core experience of participants Prior risk management analysis Existing organizational Introduction Project Description Variance thresholds ○ Prioritization of project objectives ○ Thresholds, weights and other parameters ○ ■ Definition of criteria for “unacceptable threats” and “un-missable opportunities” ■ Impact scales, probability scales, PxI matrices, weighting of project objectives, prioritization and selection criteria, degree of confidence required for overall risk (e.g., 80 th percentile) from quantitative risk analysis Risk Management Methodology Roles, responsibilities and levels of authority for risk management ○ ■ Rules of escalation Budgeting for risk management activities added to the project budget ○ ■ Adapted to the complexity and sensitivity of the project Scheduling of risk management activities in the project schedule, i.e. when certain actions ○ or reviews need to be carried out (frequency, life cycle related, etc.) APPENDIX D Reporting ○ ■ Governance-related rules of reporting and disclosure Use of Tools Documents, usage, rules for distribution (frequency, audience, etc.) ○ Document templates ○ ■ Risk register ■■ Risk status reports D.1.1.2 Templates Relevant to Risk Management Planning The risk management plan should provide a number of templates for use by the other processes. These may include: Formal structure for a risk statement An example is given in the Identify Risks section of this appendix ○ Definitions, by project objective, of probability and impact scales These guidelines may be used in Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis and in Perform Quantitative ○ Risk Analysis as well as in Plan Risk Response Planning. An example is given below. Status report templates D.1.1.3 Risk Statement “Metalanguage” In order for all risks to be clearly defi ned, a standard structure for the way in which the risk is described should be specified and applied. A typical such statement is: “Because of <one or more causes>, <risk> might occur, which would lead to <one or more effects>”. APPENDIX D D.1.1.4 Risk Prioritization and Selection Guidelines The selection and prioritization of risks must be linked to the project objectives. The risk management plan will defi ne the relative importance to be assigned to these objectives (e.g. reliability takes precedence over time, etc.): this may be in the form of numerical “weights” that can be applied to create a single weighted sum over all objectives for each risk. Any other features that may affect the urgency of dealing with a risk should also be specified (e.g. one linked to a resource that will soon disappear should be given greater urgency). D.2 Techniques, Examples and Templates for Identify Risks (Chapter 5) Identify Risks is carried out in order to develop a comprehensive list of all knowable uncertainties that could have an effect on the project’s objectives. Table D2. Identify Risks Technique Strengths Weaknesses CSFs for Effective Application Assumptions & Constraints Analysis Simple structured assumptions & constraints already listed in project charter Generates project- assumptions or constraints are often missed Requires a to speak their mind and contribute to the discussion Can involve all key ideas Requires attendance of other group dynamics May produce biased Generates non-risks representative group of stakeholders Commitment to honesty Good facilitation (e.g. categories or RBS) Cause and Effect (Ishikawa) Diagrams Visual representation become over-complex Effective selection of experience Presents detailed list become unwieldy Risks not on the list will threats, misses opportunities Regular maintenance is assist (e.g. RBS) Delphi Technique Captures input from bias Limited to technical risks expertise of experts May take longer time than Careful selection of Document review Exposes detailed tools Limited to risks relevance of prior experience FMEA/Fault Tree Analysis → see Chapter 7 Structured approach, of overall reliability using quantitative tools Good tool support not so useful for opportunities Requires expert tools not of the area being assessed Statistically accurate understanding of factors that affect project objectives Time-consuming and single objective, so does not provide whole-project view Prioritized objectives experience Allows benchmarking previously happened Excludes project-specifi c information (continued) Table D2. Identify Risks (continued) APPENDIX D Technique Strengths Weaknesses CSFs for Effective Application Influence diagrams Exposes key risk drivers intuitive insights not available through other techniques Requires disciplined determine appropriate structure Identify key areas to detail Generates Raises non-risks, questioning skills Environment of trust, Open relationship all participants to contribute Allows for different documenting Provides ideal base for dominant members who feel it is moving slowly Good briefi ng of all Post-project reviews/ Lessons Learned/ Historical Information → see Chapter 6 Leverages previous same mistakes or missing the same opportunities twice Enhances the have occurred previously Information is frequently lessons learned database Participation of previous all types of risk Stimulates creativity level Choice of list relevant thinking to identify risks Success depends on the covered by the questions Can be a simple questions Detailed briefi ng of other risk identifi cation techniques such as brainstorming Ensures coverage of omissions None comprehensive RBS, often tailored to the project Root-Cause Analysis → see Chapter 6 Allows identifi cation of to identify risks that may be related because of their common root causes. Basis for development apparent complexity Most risk management hide existence of other potential causes There may be no valid risk is an outcome of a more fundamental cause Willingness by on both threats and opportunities Offers a structured (organizational strengths and weaknesses) and external (opportunities and threats) Focuses on internally level generic risks, not project-specifi c Good facilitation the technique, to avoid confusing the four SWOT perspectives (i.e. between Strengths and Opportunities, or between Weaknesses and Threats) (continued) Table D2. Identify Risks (continued) APPENDIX D Technique Strengths Weaknesses CSFs for Effective Application System Dynamics → see Chapter 715 Exposes unexpected intuitive insights not available through other techniques Produces overall software and expertise to build models Focuses on impacts but feedback Competence in applying model Accuracy of input of the project scope are considered Provides for risks or those not specifi cally related to WBS elements Good WBS Economic Technological Environmental Environmental Operational 3. The SPECTRUM prompt list: Socio-cultural Economic Technology Uncertainty/risk D.2.1.15 Questionnaire A risk identifi cation questionnaire can be presented as a special form of checklist (see D.2.1.4), where possible risks are shown in question format (for example “Is the client’s requirement clearly defi ned?”) rather APPENDIX D than as risk statements (“The client may change the requirement after project start.”). Alternatively a risk identifi cation questionnaire can be used to present the headings from a prompt list (see D.2.1.14), asking questions such as “Are there any uncertainties arising from the use of technology on this project?” No templates or examples are presented. D.2.1.16 Risk Breakdown Structure (RBS) The risk breakdown structure (RBS) is a hierarchical framework of potential sources of risk to a project. An organization may develop a generic RBS for use across all its projects, or a project may use a project-specifi c RBS. A partial example RBS is shown below. Figure D7. Example of a Generic Risk Breakdown Structure APPENDIX D D.2.1.17 Root-Cause Analysis A root cause analysis seeks to identify basic causes of risks that may be visible symptoms of more fundamental forces. It may also identify common sources of several risks, leading to broad-reaching risk response strategies. Similarly, care needs to be taken when using this technique for risk identifi cation to distinguish between risks (uncertain causes of the impact) and issues (certain causes of the impact). In the diagram shown below the risks that were initially identified included rework, extra cost, schedule slips, low team morale, customer mistrust and repeated audits. An examination of the identified risks lead to a common root cause, that later phases of the project were typically started before the earlier ones were suffi ciently mature. This organization repeatedly ignored the proper phase entry prerequisites, hastening later project stages in order to speed up the project. Figure D8. Example of a Root Cause Analysis D.2.1.18 SWOT Analysis SWOT Analysis identifi es four characteristics of a given situation: strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats. The technique is commonly used in strategic decision making. It can be adapted for risk identifi cation by changing the interpretation of the four perspectives, such that strengths and weaknesses relate to the characteristics of the organization conducting the project, and opportunities and threats identify the project risks. The technique is particularly useful for identifying internally-generated risks arising from within the organization. For example opportunities might be found by leveraging organizational strengths, or threats might arise as a result of organizational weaknesses, as illustrated below. APPENDIX D Figure D9. Example of a SWOT Analysis Structure D.2.1.19 System Dynamics System dynamics (SD) is a particular application of inﬂ uence diagrams (see above), and can be used to identify risks within a project situation. The SD model represents entities and information ﬂ ows within a project, and analysis of the model can reveal feed-back and feed-forward loops which lead to uncertainty or instability. In addition, the results of an SD analysis can show the impact of risk events on overall project results, such as the cost or schedule results to be expected. Analyses of changes in the model or assumptions can indicate the system’s sensitivity to specifi c events, some of which may be risks. A simple example of an SD diagram is shown in Figure D11. Figure D10. Example of a Simple System Dynamics Model with Feedback Loops APPENDIX D D.2.1.20 WBS Review The work breakdown structure (WBS) for a project can form a framework for a number of other risk identifi cation techniques, such as brainstorming, risk interviews, checklists or prompt lists. No templates or examples are presented. D.3 Techniques, Examples and Templates for Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis (Chapter 6) Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis prioritizes for further analysis or handling the undifferentiated list of risks that have been identified in the Identify Risks process. Organizations tend to apply resources to those designated as “high risk,” based on their priority, often indicated by the risks’ probability and impact characteristics. D.3.1 Techniques for Perform Qualtitative Risk Analysis Example of approaches are given in Table D3 and D.3.1.1 through D.3.1.3. Table D3. Techniques for Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis Technique Strengths Weaknesses CSFs For Effective Application Root Cause Analysis See Chapter 5 Estimating techniques (applied to probability and impacts) Addresses both there is no historical database of similar events Terms for probability be uncertain or represented by a range of values that cannot be put into a specifi c impact level such as “moderate impact on time” Agreed Definitions the Definitions represent the same level of impact across objectives as perceived by the organization’s management or project stakeholders Consistent use of have experience with the type of risk Post-project reviews/ Lessons Learned/ Historical Information → see Chapter 5 Probability and Impact Matrix (P-I Matrix) Allows the organization organization’s level of risk tolerance Does not explicitly uncertainty in the assessment of a risk’s probability or impact may overlap a boundary P impact and likelihood as outlined previously Organizations should designate the levels of impact (L, M, H) for each objective should represent the same level of impact as perceived by the organization’s management or project stakeholders as reﬂ ecting the organization’s utility function (continued) Table D3. Techniques for Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis (continued) APPENDIX D Technique Strengths Weaknesses CSFs for Effective Application Analytic Hierarchy Process Assists in developing of an overall project priority list of risks created from the risks’ priority with respect to individual objectives Organizational information about pair-wise comparison of the objectives from high-level management Expert facilitator in management that it is useful to develop a consistent set of priorities among objectives Use of proper method objective Levels are defi ned by the organization as causing the same amount of pain or gain to the project for from moderate to high) the analyst may choose to assign the risk to the impact level that represents the expected or average impact. Alternatively, the risk may be ﬂ agged for extra analysis in order to reduce the range of uncertainty to fi t within a single range. An example of impact level Definitions is shown in Figure D11. These Definitions should be tailored or scaled by stakeholders to the specifi c project. The Definitions, appropriately tailored to the project, can be used for opportunities and threats. Table D3. Techniques for Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis (continued) APPENDIX D Figure D11. Example of Definitions for Levels of Probability and Impact on Four Specific Objectives Used to Evaluate Individual Risks. Note—Opportunities are to be treated as representing a positive saving in time or cost, or increased functionality. For threats, each impact scale is interpreted negatively, i.e. time delays, increased cost, or reduced functionality. D.3.1.2 Probability and Impact Matrix Organizations typically assess a risk’s priority on an objective from the combination of probability of occurrence and impact on that project objective, using Definitions such as those shown in Figure D11. Risks are then placed on a probability and impact (P-I) matrix, such as one shown below. This matrix includes both threats and opportunities. Figure D12. Example of Probability-Impact Matrix Used to Sort Risks (Threats and Opportunities) into High Risk (H), Moderate Risk (M) and Low Risk (L) Classes APPENDIX D D.3.1.3 Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) AHP is a method to calibrate preferences for achieving the different objectives of a project. Do they prefer to achieve time more than cost? Is quality more important than scope? What is the relative weighting of the project’s objectives in terms of their priority to the stakeholders or to management? The results are weights (summing to 100%) that reﬂ ect the relative priority of each objective. This prioritization can be important in determining how trade-offs affecting different objectives (e.g., Should we reduce scope to fi nish on time?) will be decided. It can also be used to create an overall project risk priority list from risks that have been assessed on their implications for individual objectives. Specialized software implementing AHP is available. A spreadsheet implementation is shown below. Figure D13. Example of Analytic Hierarchy Process Computations to Determine the Relative Weighting of Four Project Objectives APPENDIX D D.4 Techniques, Examples and Templates for Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis (Chapter 7) Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis seeks to determine the overall risk to project objectives when all risks potentially operate simultaneously on the project. It provides answers to several questions: How likely is the project to complete on the schedule date or earlier? How likely is the project actual cost confidence in the results? How should the design of the product or system be changed most economically to increase its reliability? What are the individual risks that seem to be the most important in determining the overall project risk? organization to structure the costs and benefi ts of decisions when the results are determined in part by uncertainty and risk Solution of the diffi cult to create the decision structure Probabilities of change with relatively plausible changes in the input data, meaning that the answer may not be stable The organization may the decision tree. All alternative decisions that are materially different should be considered; decision trees should be specified completely Access to high-quality function that has been validated with the organization’s decision makers (continued) APPENDIX D Technique Strengths Weaknesses CSFs for Effective Application The organization may of complicated situations requires specialized (though available) software There may be some understanding of the specialized software needed to structure and solve the decision tree Expected Monetary Value (EMV) EMV allows the user Decision Tree Analysis EMV incorporates calculation that does not require specialized software Assessment of the expected value of uncertain events; risk decisions often require more information than EMV can provide EMV is sometimes possible events that need to be included in the EMV calculation Access to historical difference between EMV and the output of simulation tools such as Monte Carlo analysis FMEA/Fault Tree Analysis → see Chapter 5 APPENDIX D Technique Strengths Weaknesses CSFs For Effective Application Monte Carlo Simulation Used primarily for risks to vary simultaneously Calculates to questions such as (1) How likely is the base plan to be successful? (2) How much contingency in time and cost do we need to achieve our desired level of confidence? (3) Which activities are important in determining the overall project risk? Schedules are input data depends heavily on the expert judgment and the effort and expertise of the risk analyst Simulation is simulation requires specialized software which must be acquired and learned, causing a barrier to its use Will produce project model. Typical models include the cost estimate and the schedule Use summary-level quality data on risks including the risk’s impact on project elements, uncertain activity durations and uncertain cost elements; the credibility depends on the quality of the data collected Use of correct The percentages represent probabilities of the event occurring (e.g., Major Problems) “True” indicates the decision option taken from the square decision node, whereas “false” are available to address signifi cant events before their occurrence Can give a false feeling must be clearly defi ned and tracked APPENDIX D Technique Strengths Weaknesses CSFs for Effective Application Allows rapid and professionalism of the way in which the project is managed The plans need to be organization to execute the plan and provide the budget and resources when the trigger condition occurs Contingency reserve estimation Provides a rationale discussion with sponsor Makes the reserve management agreed with sponsor and senior management Critical Chain Project Management (CCPM) Along with many other risk by the addition of “feeding buffers” to absorb statistical variations on the durations of non-critical path activities to reduce their contribution to schedule risk Partly mitigates thresholds can be used as trigger condition for specifi c response actions Special software is deal with predictable common cause variation, but may be inadequate to cater for special causes “Indicative” start estimates represent 50% confidence levels (this weakness is not followed in all variants of this class of tool) Not all project resourced project schedule Understanding of, of the buffers by all team members concerned (continued) APPENDIX D Technique Strengths Weaknesses CSFs for Effective Application Decision Tree Analysis → see Chapter 7 Allows calculation experts in the process Expected Monetary Value (EMV) → see Chapter 7 Provides an estimate suggest where best to apply the responses Industry knowledge base → see Chapter 5 Some risks have practitioners can provide both new ideas and act as “devil’s advocate” for potential responses Nominal Group Technique → see Chapter 5 Useful as a creativity of selecting the responses that best supports the full set of project objectives Can give counter- of weighted project success criteria Post-project reviews/ Lessons Learned/ Historical Information → see Chapter 5 Leverages previous Quantitative Risk Analysis → see Chapter 7 Provides a means or complex for the benefi t envisaged Prior effective organization to identify and to address the fundamental causes of risks for effi cient and effective responses; responding at the level of the root cause may effectively address multiple risks Can provide a potential effect of the relevant risk and the corresponding response strategy Forces the secondary risks Adds to the list of consuming All participants need penetration to trigger actions such as adjusting the relative priority of tasks (continued) APPENDIX D Technique Strengths Weaknesses CSFs for Effective Application Reserve Analysis Provides a means of need to communicate with sponsor Could lead to measure of reserve depletion may hide detailed risks Prior detailed reserve the contingency reserve of time or cost relative to the risk to overall project completion date and budget Risk Audits Provide a formal the project and taken as too judgemental to the project team Well-specified risk burden it places on the project team Risk Reassessment Forces a review of Well-maintained verifying information about the status of risks (active, occurred, retired) and maintaining team understanding Can seem preparation and discipline Trend Analysis Provides an indication conditions for responses Requires analysis of the critical values APPENDIX D Technique Strengths Weaknesses CSFs for Effective Application Variance Analysis Allows comparison conditions for responses Provides data relationship with earlier data The values can be Definitions of thresholds for “signifi cant variance” D.6.1.1 Reserve Analysis An analytical technique to determine the essential features and relationships of components in the project management plan to establish a reserve for the schedule duration, budget, estimated cost, or funds for a project. Tracking the state of the reserve through project execution will provide summary information as to the evolution of the status of the corresponding risks. This information can be useful when reporting up the organization to those responsible for several projects. In addition, once a corresponding risk occurs or ceases to be current (i.e. when it can no longer impact the project), the corresponding reserve needs to be reviewed in order to assess whether it still provides the agreed level of confidence. Time buffers can be used in two different ways: To provide for accepted schedule risks, as described above or In contrast with the contingency reserve for identified risks, the buffers in CCPM provide a shared mechanism for accommodating the natural variability of activity durations over a sequence (or chain) of activities. Tracking the rate at which each such buffer is used during project execution provides valuable information at a given point in time as to the level of schedule risk along that chain, and is used in CCPM for adapting the priority or management focus for additional analysis and as necessary triggering further risk management activities. No templates or examples are presented. APPENDIX D D.6.1.2 Risk Audits Risk audits are carried out in order to evaluate: Are the risk management rules being carried out as specified ? No templates or examples are presented. D.6.1.3 Risk Reassessment The objective of risk reassessment is to ensure that the full risk management cycle is repeated as required to ensure effective control. See Figure D20. Figure D20. The Risk Reassessment Process D.6.1.4 Status Meetings Risks can and should be on the agenda at all project reviews. Typically, the agenda items should cover the following: Top priority risks at present. What is the status of the actions? ○ APPENDIX D Risks responded to in the last period . Impact on the plans . ○ Lessons to be added to the Organizational Process Assets . Guide) — Third Edition. Newtown Square, PA USA: Project Management Institute. UK Offi ce of Government Commerce (OGC). 2007. Management of risk—Guidance for practitioners . London, UK: The Stationery Offi ce, ISBN 0-11331038-2. GLOSSARY Assumptions. Assumptions are factors that, for planning purposes, are considered to be true, real, or certain without proof or demonstration. Assumptions affect all aspects of project planning and are part of the progressive elaboration of the project. Project teams frequently identify, document, and validate assumptions as part of their planning process. Assumptions generally involve a degree of risk. Benefi t. Positive effect on a project objective arising from the occurrence of an opportunity. Bias. During information gathering about risk, the source of information exhibits a preference or an inclination that inhibits impartial judgment. Types of bias which commonly affect the risk process include cognitive and motivational bias. Cause. Events or circumstances which currently exist and which might give rise to risks. Consequence. See impact . Constraint. The state, quality, or sense of being restricted to a given course of action or inaction. An applicable restriction or limitation, either internal or external to a project, which will affect the performance of the project or a process. Contingency Reserve. The amount of funds, budget, or time needed above the estimate to reduce the risk of overruns of project objectives to a level acceptable to the organization. Contingency Plan. A plan developed in anticipation of the occurrence of a risk, to be executed only if specifi c, predetermined trigger conditions arise. Decision Tree Analysis. The decision tree is a diagram that describes a decision under consideration and the implications of choosing one or another of the available alternatives. It is used when some future scenarios or outcomes of actions are uncertain. It incorporates probabilities and the cost or rewards of each logical path of events and future decisions, and uses expected monetary value analysis to help the organization identify the relative values of alternative actions. Effect. Conditional future events or conditions which would directly affect one or more project objectives if the associated risk happened. Emergent Risk. A risk which arises later in a project and which could not have been identified earlier on. Identify Risks. The process of determining which risks may affect the project and documenting their characteristics. Impact. A measure of the effect of a risk on one or more objectives if it occurs. Also known as consequence . GLOSSARY Individual Risk. A specifi c uncertain event or condition which, if it occurs, has a positive or negative effect on at least one project objective. Issue. See problem . Likelihood. See probability . Monitor and Control Risks. The process of implementing risk response plans, tracking identified risks, monitoring residual risks, identifying new risks, and evaluating the risk process throughout the project life cycle. Monte Carlo Analysis. A technique that computes or iterates the project cost or project schedule many times using input values, selected at random from probability distributions of possible costs or durations, to calculate a distribution of possible total project cost or completion dates. Objective. Something toward which work is to be directed, a strategic position to be attained or a purpose to be achieved, a result to be obtained, a product to be produced, or a service to be performed. Opportunity. A condition or situation favorable to the project, a positive set of circumstances, a positive set of events, a risk that will have a positive impact on project objectives, or a possibility for positive changes. Contrast with threat . Overall Project Risk. Overall project risk represents the effect of uncertainty on the project as a whole. Overall project risk is more than the sum of individual risks on a project, since it applies to the whole project rather than to individual elements or tasks. It represents the exposure of stakeholders to the implications of variations in project outcome measured in terms of the corresponding objectives. Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis. The process of prioritizing risks for further analysis or action by assessing and combining their probability of occurrence and impact. Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis. The process of numerically analyzing the effect of identified risks on overall project objectives. Plan Risk Management. The process of defi ning how to conduct risk management activities for a project. Plan Risk Responses. The process of developing options and actions to enhance opportunities and to reduce threats to project objectives. Probability. A measure of how likely an individual risk is to occur. Also known as likelihood . Problem. Negative effect on a project objective arising from occurrence of a threat. Project Risk Management. Project Risk Management includes the processes concerned with conducting risk management planning, identifi cation, analysis, responses, and monitoring and control on a project. The purpose of Project Risk Management is to increase the probability and impact of positive events and decrease the probability and impact of events adverse to project objectives. GLOSSARY Response Strategy. A high-level approach to address an individual risk or overall project risk, broken down into a set of risk actions. Risk. An uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has a positive or negative effect on a project’s objectives. Risk Action. A detailed task which implements in whole or in part a response strategy in order to address an individual risk or overall project risk. Risk Action Owner. The person responsible for carrying out the approved risk actions for responding to a given risk. Also known as “response owner” when the context allows it. Risk Attitude. A chosen mental disposition towards uncertainty, adopted explicitly or implicitly by individuals and groups, driven by perception, and evidenced by observable behavior. Risk attitude exists on a continuous spectrum, but common risk attitudes include risk averse, risk tolerant, risk neutral and risk seeking. Risk Breakdown Structure (RBS) [Tool] A hierarchically organized depiction of the identified project risks arranged by risk category and subcategory that identifi es the various areas and causes of potential risks. The risk breakdown structure is often tailored to specifi c project types. Risk Category. A group of potential causes of risk. Risk causes may be grouped into categories such as technical, external, organizational, environmental, or project management. A category may include subcategories such as technical maturity, weather, or aggressive estimating. See also Risk Breakdown Structure (RBS) Risk Exposure. A measure of overall project risk describing the overall effect of identified risks on objectives. Risk Management Plan. The document describing how Project Risk Management will be structured and performed on the project. It is contained in or is a subsidiary plan of the project management plan. The risk management plan can be informal and broadly framed, or formal and highly detailed, based on the needs of the project. Information in the risk management plan varies by application area and project size. The risk management plan is different from the risk register that contains the list of project risks, the results of risk analysis, and the risk responses. Risk Metalanguage. A structured description of a risk which separates cause, risk, and effect. A typical risk description using risk metalanguage might be in the form: “Because of <cause>, <risk> might occur, which would lead to <effect>.” Risk Model. A representation of the project including data about project elements and risks that can be analyzed by quantitative methods. Risk Owner . The person responsible for ensuring that an appropriate response strategy is selected and implemented, and for determining suitable risk actions to implement the chosen strategy, with each risk action assigned to a single risk action owner. GLOSSARY Risk Register. The document containing the results of the qualitative risk analysis, quantitative risk analysis, and risk response planning. The risk register details all identified risks, including description, category, cause, probability of occurring, impact(s) on objectives, proposed responses, owners, and current status. Risk Threshold. A measure of the level of risk exposure above which action must be taken to address risks proactively, and below which risks may be accepted. Root Cause. An initiating cause that gives rise to a causal chain which may give rise to risks. Secondary Risk. A risk that arises as a direct result of implementing a risk response. Stakeholder. Person or organization (e.g., customer, sponsor, performing organization, or the public) that is actively involved in the project, or whose interests may be positively or negatively affected by execution or completion of the project. A stakeholder may also exert inﬂ uence over the project and its deliverables. Threat. A condition or situation unfavorable to the project, a negative set of circumstances, a negative set of events, a risk that will have a negative impact on a project objective if it occurs, or a possibility for negative changes. Contrast with opportunity . Trigger Condition. Circumstance under which a risk strategy or risk action will be invoked. INDEX A Action planning, 48 Agreed-upon approach, 32 Agreed-upon risk terms Definitions, 32 Appropriate project model, 39 Assumptions, 4, 5, 13, 43 Assumptions analysis, 28 B Bias, 27 Budgets, 19, 44–45 Cause, risk, and effect, 29 Communication, 11 Complete risk statement, 26 Compliance, tracking, 55 Comprehensive identifi cation, 26 Comprehensive risk representation, 40 Constraints, 5, 7, 13, 21, 43 Contingency plan, 47, 52 Contingency reserve plan risk responses, 45 project risk management, 4, 10, 15 qualitative risk analysis, 32 quantitative risk analysis, 37–38, 41–42 risk monitoring and control, 54–55 Contingency response strategy, 48 Creativity techniques, 28–29 Credibility building, 32 Critical success factors plan risk responses, 44–46 project risk management, 6–7 qualitative risk analysis, 31–33 quantitative risk analysis, 38–40 risk identifi cation process, 25–27 risk management plan, 21–22 risk monitoring and control, 53–54 Current assessments, 28 Data, collecting and analyzing, 34 Data gathering tools, 40 Decision tree analysis, 37, 39 Detail, level of, 27 Documenting results, 35, 55 E Early identifi cation, 25 Effect, 9, 29 Emergent identifi cation, 26 Emergent risk, 16, 26 Exposure, 50 H High impact, 20 High-quality risk data, 39 High-quality information, 33 Historical review, 28 Identify Risks, 25–29 Impact, 9 Impact, high, 20 Individual risk plan risk responses, 46–48 project risk management, 10, 15–16 qualitative risk analysis, 33–34 quantitative risk analysis, 39–40 risk monitoring and control, 54 Issues, 10 Iterative process, 11 qualitative risk analysis, 33 quantitative risk analysis, 42 risk identifi cation process, 26 INDEX Monitor And Control Risks, 51–55 Monte Carlo analysis, 37, 39, 40 O Objective plan risk responses, 43–44 qualitative risk analysis, 31 quantitative risk analysis, 37–38 risk identifi cation process, 25–26 risk management plan, 19–21, 22 risk monitoring and control, 51–52 Objectivity, 27 Opportunities addressing threats and, 46 explicit identifi cation of, 26 plan risk responses, 46 risk identifi cation process, 26 risk response strategies, 47 Overall project risk plan risk responses, 47 Project Risk Management, 10, 15–16 qualitative risk analysis, 31 quantitative risk analysis, 37–39 risk monitoring and control, 55 Ownership, 27, 48–49. See also Risk action owner; Risk owner P Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis, 31–35 Perform Quantitative RIsk Analysis, 37–42 Plan Risk Management, 19–24 process-related criteria, 20 project-related criteria, 20 templates, 23 Plan Risk Responses, 43–50 action planning, 48 addressing threats and opportunities, 46 appropriate, timely, effective, and agreed-upon responses, ensuring, 46 communication with stakeholders, 44 critical success factors, 44–46 developing strategies before tactical responses, 46 exposure, reviewing and documenting, 50 interaction of risks and responses, 45–46 ownership and responsibility assignment, 48–49 project management plan and, 50 purpose and objectives, 43–44 quantitative risk analysis, 42 resources, budget, and schedule, 45 response identifi cation, 48 response selection, 48 results, documenting, 50 risk register and, 50 roles and responsibilities, clear Definition, 45 steps involved, 49 timing, specifying, 45 tools and techniques, 47–49 Prior risk identifi cation, 39 Probability Project Risk Management, 4, 9 qualitative risk analysis, 32, 34–35 quantitative risk analysis, 40–42 Problem, 10, 15, 35 Process-related criteria, 20 Project management plan, 50 Project manager, 12 Project monitoring and control, 53 Project risk, 9–10 Project Risk Management critical success factors, 6–7 Definition, 4 process, 14–16 process ﬂ ow diagram, 17 project manager, role, 12 responsibility for, 12 role in project management, 4–5 Project-related criteria, 20 Q Qualitative risk analysis agreed-upon approach, 32 agreed-upon Definitions of risk terms, 32 assessing risk importance, 34 categorizing risk causes, 35 collecting and analyzing data, 34 comparison with quantitative risk analysis, 38 credibility building, 32 critical success factors, 31–33 ﬂ ow chart, 33 INDEX high-quality information, 33 iterative, 33 prioritizing risks, 34 purpose and objectives, 31 quantitative risk analysis and, 39 results documentation, 35 tools and techniques, 33–35 Quantitative risk analysis appropriate project model, 39 comparison with qualitative risk analysis, 38 comprehensive risk representation, 40 critical success factors, 38–40 data gathering tools, 40 high-quality risk data, commitment to collecting, 39 interrelationships between risks, 40 overall project risk derived from individual risks, 39 prior risk identifi cation, 39 purpose and objectives, 37–38 qualitative risk analysis, 39 response planning, information, 42 results, documenting, 41 results, effective presenting, 41 risk impact calculation, 40 structure, 41 tools and techniques, 40–42 unbiased data, 39 uncertainty, appropriate analysis method, 40 R RBS. See Risk breakdown structures Resources, budget, and schedule, 45 Response identifi cation, 48 selection, 48 strategy, 45, 48 Responsibility assignment, 48–49 Results documenting, 50 effective presenting, 41 quantitative risk analysis, 41 risk identifi cation process, 29 Risk, 9 Risk action owner plan risk responses, 43, 45, 46, 49 risk monitoring and control, 51, 54 Risk assessment, 34 Risk attitude, 10–11, 20, 43 Risk awareness, 54 Risk breakdown structures (RBS), 23, 28, 35, 45 Risk categories, 21, 28, 31, 35, 45 Risk causes, 35 Risk exposure, 16 Risk identifi cation cause, risk, and effect, 29 complete risk statement, 26 comprehensive identifi cation, 26 creativity techniques, 28–29 critical success factors, 25–27 current assessments, 28 detail, level of, 27 early identifi cation, 25 emergent identifi cation, 26 historical review, 28 iterative identifi cation, 26 multiple perspectives, 26 objectivity, 27 opportunities, explicit identifi cation, 26 ownership, 27 project objectives, risks linked, 26 purpose and objectives, 25 results, documenting, 29 three perspectives, 27 tools and techniques, 27–29 Risk impact calculation, 40 Risk management, good practices, 5 Risk management plan critical success factors, 21–22 elements of, 23 organization’s objectives, policies, and practices comp- liance, 22 planning sessions, 22 process-related criteria, 20 project-related criteria, 20 purpose and objectives, 19–21 results, documentation, 22 stakeholder involvement, 22 success barriers, 21 templates, 23 tools and techniques, 22–23 Risk meta-language, 29 INDEX Risk model, 39–40 Risk monitoring and control compliance, tracking, 55 contingency reserves, managing, 54–55 critical success factors, 53–54 overall risk, tracking, 55 project monitoring and control, integrating with, 53 purpose and objectives of, 51–52 results documentation, 55 risk awareness, maintaining, 54 schematic representation of, 53 tools and techniques, 54–55 trigger conditions, 54, 55 Risk owner plan risk responses, 43, 49 project risk management, 15–16 risk identifi cation, 27, 29 risk monitoring and control, 51, 54 Risk prioritization, 34 Risk register, 23, 29, 35, 50, 52 Risk response strategies, 46, 47 Risk threshold, 14 Risks, interrelationships between, 40 Risks and responses, interaction, 45–46 Roles and responsibilities, 45 Root cause, 31, 35, 40, 45 S Schedules, 37–42, 45 Secondary risk, 18, 43, 46, 48 Stakeholder communication with, 44 project risk management involvement, 22 risk attitude, 10–11, 20, 43 T Templates, 20–23 Threats, 9–10, 43, 46–47 Timing, 45 Tools and techniques plan risk responses, 47–49 qualitative risk analysis, 33–35 quantitative risk analysis, 40–42 risk identifi cation, 27–29 risk management plan, 22–23 risk monitoring and control, 54–55 Trigger conditions plan risk responses, 43, 48 risk identifi cation, 27, 29 risk monitoring and control, 51, 54, 55 U Unbiased data, 39 Uncertainty plan risk management, 20 project risk management, 9–10, 13 quantitative risk analysis, 40 risk identifi cation, 25–28