1.4 good risk management practice project risk management is a valuable component of project management and it enhances the value of the other project management processes. as with all of these processes project risk management should be conducted in a manner consistent with existing organizational practices and policies. in addition like the other processes involved in project management project risk management should be conducted in a way that is appropriate to the project. project risk management should recognize the business challenges as well as the multi cultural environment associated with an increasingly global environment including many joint venture projects and customers suppliers and workforces spread around the globe. changes in the project management plan that result from the project risk management process may require decisions at the appropriate level of management to reassign personnel establish or modify budgets make commitments to others outside the project interact with regulators and comply with the rules of accounting and law. project risk management should be conducted in compliance with these internal and external requirements. chapter 1 introduction project risk management should always be conducted on an ethical basis in keeping with the project management code of ethics or conduct. honesty responsibility realism professionalism and fair dealing with others are among the characteristics of successful project risk management. effective project risk management benefits from robust communication and consultation with stakeholders. this enables agreement among stakeholders that project risk management in general and risk identification analysis and response in particular should be carried out in a realistic and objective way and should not be subject to political or other unreasonable infl uences. project risk management should be conducted on all projects. the degree level of detail sophistication of tools and amount of time and resources applied to project risk management should be in proportion to the characteristics of the project under management and the value that they can add to the outcome. thus a large project that provides value to an important customer would theoretically require more resources time and attention to project risk management than would a smaller short term internal project that can be conducted in the background with a fl exible deadline. each of the project risk management processes should be scaled to be appropriate to the project under management during the plan risk management process and reviewed periodically to determine if the decisions made in that process remain appropriate.