1.3 role of project risk management in project management project risk management is not an optional activity it is essential to successful project management. it should be applied to all projects and hence be included in project plans and operational documents. in this way it becomes an integral part of every aspect of managing the project in every phase and in every process group. many of the project management processes address planning the project from concept to final design and from procurement through daily management of execution and close out. these processes often assume an unrealistic degree of certainty about the project and therefore they need to include treatment of project risks. project risk management addresses the uncertainty in project estimates and assumptions. therefore it builds upon and extends other project management processes. for instance project scheduling provides dates and critical paths based on activity durations and resource availability assumed to be known with certainty. quantitative risk analysis explores the uncertainty in the estimated durations and may provide alternative dates and critical paths that are more realistic given the risks to the project. project risk management is not a substitute for the other project management processes. on the contrary project risk management requires that these project management processes e.g. scheduling budgeting and change management be performed at the level of the best practices available. project risk management adds the perspective of project risk to the outputs of those other processes and adds to their value by taking risk into account. for instance risk management provides the basis upon which to estimate the amount of cost and schedule contingency reserves that are needed to cover risk response actions to a required level of confidence for meeting project objectives. chapter 1 introduction there is a paradox about project risk that affects most projects. in the early stages of a project the level of risk exposure is at its maximum but information on the project risks is at a minimum. this situation does not mean that a project should not go forward because little is known at that time. rather there may be different ways of approaching the project that have different risk implications. the more this situation is recognized the more realistic the project plans and expectations of results will be. a risk management approach is applicable throughout a project s life cycle. the earlier in the project life cycle that the risks are recognized the more realistic the project plans and expectations of results will be. risk management continues to add value as project planning progresses and more information becomes available about all aspects and components of the project and its environment such as stakeholders scope time and cost as well as the corresponding assumptions and constraints. the balance between project fl exibility and knowledge about project risk needs to be reviewed regularly and optimized as the plans develop. it is true that as the project plan becomes set with fundamental decisions agreements and contracts in place the options for making substantial changes to capture opportunities or mitigate threats are reduced. during project execution risk management processes monitor the changes the project undergoes for new risks that may emerge so that appropriate responses to them can be developed as well as check for existing risks that are no longer plausible. project risk management plays a role in providing realistic expectations for the completion dates and cost of the project even if there are few options for changing the future. finally throughout the project and during project closure risk related lessons are reviewed in order to contribute to organizational learning and support continuous improvement of project risk management practice.