1.5 critical success factors for project risk management figure 1 2. critical success factors for project risk management chapter 1 introduction specific criteria for success of each project risk management process are listed in the chapters dealing with those processes. the general criteria for success include recognize the value of risk management project risk management should be recognized as a valuable discipline that provides a positive potential return on investment for organizational management project stakeholders both internal and external project management and team members. individual commitment responsibility project participants and stakeholders should all accept responsibility for undertaking risk related activities as required. risk management is everybody s responsibility. open and honest communication everyone should be involved in the project risk management process. any actions or attitudes that hinder communication about project risk reduce the effectiveness of project risk management in terms of proactive approaches and effective decision making. organizational commitment organizational commitment can only be established if risk management is aligned with the organization s goals and values. project risk management may require a higher level of managerial support than other project management disciplines because handling some of the risks will require approval of or responses from others at levels above the project manager. risk effort scaled to project project risk management activities should be consistent with the value of the project to the organization and with its level of project risk its scale and other organizational constraints. in particular the cost of project risk management should be appropriate to its potential value to the project and the organization. integration with project management project risk management does not exist in a vacuum isolated from other project management processes. successful project risk management requires the correct execution of the other project management processes. these critical success factors for project risk management are illustrated in figure 1 2.