1.1 purpose of the practice standard for project risk management the purpose of the practice standard for project risk management is to a provide a standard for project management practitioners and other stakeholders that defines the aspects of project risk management that are recognized as good practice on most projects most of the time and b provide a standard that is globally applicable and consistently applied. this practice standard has a descriptive purpose rather than one used for training or educational purposes. the practice standard for project risk management covers risk management as it is applied to single projects only. like the pmbok guide fourth edition this practice standard does not cover risk in programs or portfolios of projects. chapter 11 of the pmbok guide fourth edition is the basis for the practice standard for project risk management . this practice standard is consistent with that chapter emphasizing the concepts and principles relating to project risk management. it is aligned with other pmi practice standards. figure 1 1 compares the purposes of this practice standard to those of the pmbok guide fourth edition and textbooks handbooks and courses. figure 1 1. hierarchy of pmi project risk management resources chapter 1 introduction this practice standard is organized in three main sections 1. introductory material including the framework purpose principles context of and introduction to project risk management processes as defined in the pmbok guide fourth edition. 2. principles underlying the six project risk management processes in the pmbok guide fourth edition. the six processes are as follows plan risk management identify risks perform qualitative risk analysis perform quantitative risk analysis plan risk responses and monitor and control risks. each of these six processes is described in a chapter that addresses the following four topics a purpose and objectives of the process b critical success factors for the process c tools and techniques for the process and d documenting the results of the process. 3. a glossary of terms which are used in this practice standard. this practice standard emphasizes those principles that are fundamental to effective comprehensive and successful project risk management. these principles can and should be stated at a general level for several reasons 1. principles are expected to be agreed upon now and to be valid in the future. while tools and techniques are constantly evolving the principles have more stability and persistence. 2. different projects organizations and situations will require different approaches to project risk management. in particular risk management is a discipline that contains a series of processes to apply to both large and small projects. risk management will be more effective if its practice is tailored to the project and congruent with the organizational culture processes and assets. there are many different ways of conducting risk management that may comply with the principles of project risk management as presented in this practice standard. 3. the principles are applicable to projects carried out in a global context refl ecting the many business and organizational arrangements between participants for example joint ventures between commercial and national companies government and non government organizations and the cross cultural environment often found on these project teams. the principles described herein can be used as a check for an organization s processes. practitioners can establish processes specific to their particular situation project or organization and then compare them with these principles thus validating them against good project risk management practice. chapter 1 introduction