2.2 definition of project risk the word risk is used in many ways in everyday language and in various specialist disciplines. its use in the pmbok guide fourth edition is consistent with other risk management standards and process descriptions. the definition of project risk given in the pmbok guide fourth edition is as follows project risk is an uncertain event or condition that if it occurs has a positive or a negative effect on a project s objectives. this definition includes two key dimensions of risk uncertainty and effect on a project s objectives. when assessing the importance of a project risk these two dimensions must both be considered. the uncertainty dimension may be described using the term probability and the effect may be called impact though other descriptors are possible such as likelihood and consequence . the definition of risk includes both distinct events which are uncertain but can be clearly described and more general conditions which are less specific but also may give risk to uncertainty. the definition of project risk also encompasses uncertain events which could have a negative effect on a project s objectives as well as those which could have a positive effect. these two types of risk are called respectively threats and opportunities. it is important to address both threats and opportunities within a unified project risk management process. this allows for the gain of synergies and effi ciencies such as addressing both in the same analyses and coordinating the responses to both if they overlap or can reinforce each other. chapter 2 principles and concepts risks are uncertain future events or conditions which may or may not occur but which would matter if they did occur. it is important to distinguish risks from risk related features such as cause and effect. causes are events or circumstances which currently exist or are certain to exist in the future and which might give rise to risks. effects are conditional future events or conditions which would directly affect one or more project objectives if the associated risk occurs. the cause risk effect chain can be used in a structured risk statement or risk description to ensure that each of these three elements is properly described see section 5.3 . when a risk event occurs it ceases to become uncertain. threats which occur may be called issues or problems opportunities which occur may be called benefits. both issues problems and benefits entail project management actions that are outside the scope of the project risk management process.