3.1 project risk management and project management all projects are uncertain. uncertainty is inevitable since projects are unique and temporary undertakings based on assumptions and constraints delivering project results to multiple stakeholders with different requirements. project management can be seen as an attempt to control this uncertain environment through the use of structured and disciplined techniques such as estimating planning cost control task allocation earned value analysis monitoring and review meetings etc. each of these elements of project management has a role in defi ning or controlling the uncertainty which is inherent in all projects. project risk management provides an approach by which uncertainty can be understood assessed and managed within projects. as such it forms an integral part of project management and effective project risk management is a critical success factor for project success. for project management to be fully effective however it is important that project risk management is not viewed as an optional process or performed as an additional overhead task. since many elements of project management address inherent uncertainty the interface between structured project risk management and the other processes of project management needs to be clear. the outputs of project risk management should be taken into account within many of the project management processes. they can for example impact estimating resource requirements cost or duration assessing the impact of proposed scope changes planning or re planning the forward strategy of the project allocating resources to tasks and reporting progress to stakeholders. none of these actions can be performed properly without a clear view of the risk involved as determined during the project risk management process. in other words project management process effectiveness is increased by using the information and results from project risk management. in addition effective project risk management requires input from other project management processes. outputs such as the work breakdown structure wbs estimates the project schedule assumptions list etc. are all important prerequisites for effective project risk management. chapter 3 introduction to project risk management processes