3.2 project risk management processes the defined steps of project risk management describe a structured approach for understanding and managing risk on a project. this chapter outlines the steps required for effective project risk management. each step is described in more detail in subsequent chapters. as previously defined project risk is an uncertain event or condition that if it occurs has a positive or negative effect on a project s objectives. from this definition it is clear that risks only exist in relation to objectives. it is therefore essential at the start of the project risk management process to clearly define the objectives. it is also clear that different projects are exposed to different levels of risk so each step in the project risk management process should be scalable to meet the varying degrees of risk. scalable elements of the process include available resources methodology and processes used tools and techniques used supporting infrastructure review and update frequency and reporting requirements. as a precondition for a successful project risk management implementation it is important to have a clear understanding of the risk thresholds that define the key stakeholders views on acceptable levels of risk as well as a framework against which identified risks can be assessed. as a result the project risk management process always starts with an initiation step. this is required in order to ensure a common understanding and agreement of the team and other stakeholders on the approach and parameters that will be applied in managing risk in this project as well as the scope and objectives of the project risk management process itself. project risk management activities resources and attention should be appropriate to the project since different projects warrant different levels of risk management application. the main actions to provide the required tailoring are as follows define those objectives against which risks will be identified define how the elements of the project risk management process will be scaled for this project and define risk thresholds tolerances and the assessment framework. the outputs from this initial step should be documented communicated and then reviewed by the stakeholders to ensure a common understanding of the scope and objectives for the project risk management process. the document should be formally approved at a senior level. chapter 3 introduction to project risk management processes once the project risk management scope and objectives are agreed upon it is possible to start identifying risks being careful to distinguish genuine risks from non risks such as causes effects problems issues etc. . a variety of risk identification techniques is available each with its own strengths and weaknesses. one or more techniques should be selected as appropriate for meeting the needs of the specific project. the aim is to expose and document all knowable risks recognizing that some risks will be inherently unknowable and others will emerge later in the project. the emergent nature of risk requires the project risk management process to be iterative repeating the identify risks process in order to find risks which were not evident earlier in the project. input should be sought from a wide range of project stakeholders when identifying risks since each will have a different perspective on the risks facing the project. historical records and project documents should also be reviewed to identify risks for this project. all identified risks are recorded. ideally a risk owner is designated for each identified risk. it is the responsibility of the risk owner to manage the corresponding risk through all of the subsequent project risk management processes. following risk identification it is necessary to evaluate the importance of each risk in order to prioritize individual risks for further attention evaluate the level of overall project risk and determine appropriate responses. risk evaluation can be performed using qualitative techniques to address individual risks using quantitative techniques to consider the overall effect of risk on the project outcome or using both in combination. these two approaches require different types of data but where both qualitative and quantitative techniques are used an integrated approach should be adopted. qualitative techniques are used to gain a better understanding of individual risks considering a range of characteristics such as probability of occurrence degree of impact on project objectives manageability timing of possible impacts relationships with other risks common causes or effects etc. understanding and prioritizing risks is an essential prerequisite to managing them so qualitative techniques are used on most projects. the outputs from qualitative assessments should be documented and communicated to key project stakeholders and form a basis for determining appropriate responses. quantitative techniques provide insights into the combined effect of identified risks on the project outcome. these techniques take into account probabilistic or project wide effects such as correlation between risks interdependency and feedback loops thereby indicating the degree of overall risk faced by the project. the result is an indication of the degree of overall risk faced by the project. the results of quantitative analysis should be used to focus the development of appropriate responses particularly the calculation of required contingency reserve levels and must be documented and communicated to inform subsequent actions. quantitative techniques may not be required for all projects to ensure effective management of risk. chapter 3 introduction to project risk management processes once individual risks have been prioritized and the degree of overall project risk exposure is understood appropriate risk responses should be developed using an iterative process which continues until an optimal set of responses has been developed. a range of possible response strategies exists for both threats and opportunities. the risk owner should select a suitable strategy for each individual risk based on its characteristics and assessed priority ensuring that the strategy is achievable affordable cost effective and appropriate. the use of a single strategy that addresses several related risks should be considered whenever possible. the risk owner is responsible for defi ning actions to implement the chosen strategy. these actions may be delegated to action owners as appropriate. the risk owner should monitor actions to determine their effectiveness and also to identify any secondary risks which may arise because of the implementation of risk responses. in addition to individual risk responses actions may be taken to respond to overall project risk. all response strategies and actions should be documented and communicated to key project stakeholders and incorporated into the project plan. it is essential that agreed upon actions are implemented otherwise the risk exposure of the project remains unchanged. it is also vital that the project risk management process be repeated at regular intervals throughout the life of the project. this will enable the project team to reevaluate the status of previously identified risks to identify emergent and secondary risks and to determine the effectiveness of the project risk management process. the steps outlined previously form the project risk management process. these are detailed in subsequent chapters as follows plan risk management chapter 4 defi nes the scope and objectives of the project risk management process and ensures that the risk process is fully integrated into wider project management. identify risks chapter 5 identifies as many knowable risks as practicable. perform qualitative risk analysis chapter 6 evaluates key characteristics of individual risks enabling them to be prioritized for further action. perform quantitative risk analysis chapter 7 evaluates the combined effect of risks on the overall project outcome. plan risk responses chapter 8 determines appropriate response strategies and actions for each individual risk and for overall project risk and integrates them into a consolidated project management plan. monitor and control risks chapter 9 implements agreed upon actions reviews changes in project risk exposure identifies additional risk management actions as required and assesses the effectiveness of the project risk management process. figure 3 1 shows the fl ow of control and information between the various steps within the project risk management process. chapter 3 introduction to project risk management processes figure 3 1. project risk management process flow diagram chapter 4 plan risk management