4.1 purpose and objectives of the plan risk management process the objectives of the plan risk management process are to develop the overall risk management strategy for the project to decide how the risk management processes will be executed and to integrate project risk management with all other project management activities. effective risk management requires creation of a risk management plan. this plan describes how the risk management processes should be carried out and how they fit in with the other project management processes. on a broader level it describes the relationships among project risk management general project management and the management processes in the rest of the organization. to provide the greatest benefit initial risk management planning should be carried out early in the overall planning of the project and the corresponding risk management activities integrated into the overall project management plan. the risk management plan may subsequently need to be adapted as the needs of the project and its stakeholders become clearer or change. although the project risk management processes form an integral part of the overall project management plan a budget in terms of resources cost and time for the specific risk management activities should be established in order to better track control and as necessary defend the corresponding expenditures throughout the project. the cost of treating the risks themselves should be included appropriately in the project budget while the risk management plan should describe how this part of the project budget is evaluated allocated and managed. the risk management plan will define the monitoring methods to ensure that the corresponding expenditures are tracked appropriately as well as the conditions under which the approved budget for risk management can be modified. in the same way that project management is a process of progressive elaboration risk management activities need to be repeated throughout the project. the risk management plan should define both the normal frequency for repeating the processes as well as specific or exceptional conditions under which the corresponding actions should be initiated. the corresponding risk management activities should be integrated into the project management plan. there are two categories of success criteria for risk management those for success of the project in general and those for success of project risk management. chapter 4 plan risk management project related criteria. to assess the success of project risk management the stakeholders must agree on an acceptable level of results for the project related criteria such as cost time and scope . in order to ensure consistency and agreement among stakeholders the risk management plan should present these objectives with reference to the project definition documents. to provide guidance in risk management particularly in prioritizing risk responses stakeholders should also prioritize each project objective. process related criteria. the measures for success in project risk management depend on a number of factors such as the inherent level of uncertainty of the project. for example the project risk management process for a research project needs to address more unforeseen changes than for a project with a more predictable environment. a research project risk management process may be considered a success even if it results in more variance from the baseline than would be allowable for a successful process in a more predictable project. the level of risk that is considered acceptable in a project depends on the risk attitudes of the relevant stakeholders. the risk attitudes of both the organization and the stakeholders may be influenced by a number of factors all of which need to be identified. these include their inherent tolerance for uncertainty and the relative importance to them of achieving or missing specific project objectives. the output of this analysis should then be taken into account for setting thresholds and providing weighting factors when applying the project risk management processes in the specific project. guidelines and rules for escalating risk related information to management and other stakeholders should reflect the risk attitudes and expectations of the corresponding stakeholders. the project manager should maintain effective communication with the stakeholders as the project evolves in order to become aware of any changes in the stakeholders attitudes and adapt the risk management approach to take any new facts into account. it is important that the participants share a common understanding of all terms used to describe the risks and that the critical values and thresholds that will serve as parameters for the tools should be defined in a manner consistent with the scope of the project and the attitudes of the stakeholders. if qualitative analysis uses such terms as high impact or medium probability these should be defined objectively in the risk management plan. similarly the risk management plan should specify any key numerical values required in quantitative analysis or for decision making in risk response planning or risk monitoring and control. risk management planning should establish the type and level of risk detail to be addressed and provide a template of the risk register that will be used for recording risk related information. the risk management plan should also indicate the intensity of effort and the frequency with which the various project risk management processes should be applied this depends on the characteristics of the project as well as on the specified risk management objectives. in order for the project risk management processes to be carried out correctly and effectively the project team and other stakeholders need to know where and when they will be expected to participate their criteria for determining success their level of authority and what action to take relative to actions or decisions beyond this level. the risk management plan specifies the project s risk management roles and responsibilities and defines the corresponding expectations for both senior management and project personnel. chapter 4 plan risk management risk related communication occurs at two levels a within the project team and b between the project team and the other project stakeholders. the principles for each of these categories of communication are defined in the risk management plan. for the team the plan describes the frequency and scope of the various risk management meetings and reports required to carry out the corresponding project risk management processes as well as the structure and content of such meetings and reports. for the other stakeholders the plan sets their expectations as to the structure content and frequency of routine documents to be received as well as the way in which information will be shared for escalation or exceptional events. details of the information required by the project team from stakeholders should also be clearly defined.