4.2 critical success factors for the plan risk management process the principal criteria for a valid risk management plan are acceptance by the stakeholders alignment with the internal and external constraints on the project balance between cost or effort and benefit and completeness with respect to the needs of the project risk management process. critical success factors for the plan risk management process are detailed below. 4.2.1 identify and address barriers to successful project risk management the time and effort required to carry out the plan risk management process will not be supported unless the stakeholders and especially management in the organization responsible for the project recognize and accept the benefits of managing risk and the added value of addressing this as a skill in its own right rather than as a passive or reactive component of general project management. a clear definition of the project objectives and a high level view of the project environment and solution approach are required to provide a valid basis for risk management. the project manager should therefore ensure that valid definition and planning information is available for the plan risk management activity. an organization inexperienced in risk management planning may need to develop its own approach and may expend an inappropriate amount of time and effort on this. alternatively it may use a proprietary or pre existing approach which requires tailoring. the availability of some or all of the following organizational process assets contributes to the chances of success of the plan risk management activities standard templates predefined risk categories and an established project management methodology incorporating risk management procedures that specify what risk information is required for decision making when it is required and a definition of concepts and terms roles responsibilities and authority levels. access to relevant lessons learned at this stage will allow this experience to be taken into account from the start of the project. the risk management plan will not deliver its value unless project risk management is carried out as an integral part of the project. the corresponding activities should be built into the project work breakdown structure and included in the corresponding schedule budget and work assignment documents. chapter 4 plan risk management