6.3.5 categorize risk causes categorizing risks appropriately may lead to improved analysis of the probability and magnitude of project risk and to effective responses. understanding the relationships between risks may provide a better understanding of the possibility and magnitude of project risk than if risks are only considered as separate and independent events. identifying common root causes of a group of risks for instance may reveal both the magnitude of the risk event for the group as a whole along with effective strategies that might address several risks simultaneously. alternatively some risks may be linked with others in a causal chain and understanding the chain of risks may lead to a better understanding of the implication of risk for the project. identifying risks that can occur at the same time or using the same resources for recovery might provide a realistic picture of problems of risk mitigation using scarce resources. combining the results of the perform qualitative risk analysis process with the risk breakdown structure see identify risks chapter 5 can show clusters of priority risks arising from specific sources. a combination of the risk analysis information with the work breakdown structure wbs can show which areas of the project exhibit the most risk. assessing the high priority risks impact on one objective such as the schedule may indicate which activities to address to reduce that objective s uncertainty. all of these approaches can contribute to the realism and usefulness of the qualitative risk analysis. 6.3.6 document the results of the perform qualitative risk analysis process the perform qualitative risk analysis process adds structure to the list of undifferentiated risks see identify risks chapter 5 into categories of priority. priorities are usually based on the risk s probability of occurring and its potential impact on specific project objectives or on the whole project. each identified risk is assigned a priority perhaps by objective or for the entire project. this information is usually stored in the risk register which is easy to use and update with new information. the risk register list of prioritized risks is posted to the project participants who are responsible for further analysis or action to improve the project plan. risks that are judged to have high priority are segregated for further analysis and response planning and are generally monitored frequently. risks of low priority to the project may be placed on a watch list and are reviewed less often for changes in their status. chapter 7 perform quantitative risk analysis