7.1 purpose and objectives of the perform quantitative risk analysis process the perform quantitative risk analysis process provides a numerical estimate of the overall effect of risk on the objectives of the project based on current plans and information when considering risks simultaneously. results from this type of analysis can be used to evaluate the likelihood of success in achieving project objectives and to estimate contingency reserves usually for time and cost that are appropriate to both the risks and the risk tolerance of project stakeholders. it is generally accepted that analyzing uncertainty in the project using quantitative techniques such as monte carlo simulation may provide more realism in the estimate of the overall project cost or schedule than a non probabilistic approach which assumes that the activity durations or line item cost estimates are deterministic. however it should be recognized that quantitative risk analysis is not always required or appropriate for all projects. for example qualitative risk analysis may provide enough information for development of effective risk responses especially for smaller projects. therefore during the plan risk management process the benefits of quantitative risk analysis should be weighed against the effort required to ensure that the additional insights and value justify the additional effort. partial risk analyses such as qualitative risk analysis aim at prioritizing individual risks viewed one at a time and therefore cannot produce measures of overall project risk when all risks are considered simultaneously. calculating estimates of overall project risk is the focus of the perform quantitative risk analysis process. specific project risks are usually best understood and quantified at a detailed level such as the line item cost or schedule activity level. by contrast project objectives such as achievement of the project s budget or the schedule are specified at a higher level often at the level of the total project. an overall risk analysis such as one that uses quantitative techniques estimates the implication of all quantified risks on project objectives. the implementation of overall risk analysis using quantitative methods requires complete and accurate representation of the project objectives built up from individual project elements. examples of these representations include the project schedule or cost estimate. identifying risks on individual project elements such as schedule activities or line item costs at a level of detail that lends itself to specific assessment of individual risks. including generic risks that have a broader effect than individual project elements. applying a quantitative method such as monte carlo simulation or decision tree analysis that incorporates multiple risks simultaneously in determining overall impact on the overall project objective. chapter 7 perform quantitative risk analysis results of the quantitative analysis will be compared to the project plan baseline or current to give management an estimate of the overall project risk and will answer important questions such as what is the probability of meeting the project s objectives how much contingency reserve e.g. reserves or buffers of time resources and cost is needed to provide the organization with the level of certainty it requires based upon its risk tolerance what are those parts of the project such as line item costs or schedule activities which contribute the most risk when all risks are considered simultaneously which individual risks contribute the most to overall project risk estimating overall project risk using quantitative methods helps distinguish those projects where quantified risks threaten objectives beyond the tolerance of the stakeholders from those for which the objectives are within acceptable tolerances even when risk is considered. the former may be targeted for vigorous risk responses aimed at protecting those objectives most important to the stakeholders. a high level comparison of quantitative and qualitative risk analysis processes is presented in figure 7 1. figure 7 1. comparison of qualitative and quantitative approaches