9.1 purpose and objectives of the monitor and control risks process the primary objectives of risk monitoring and controlling are to track identified risks monitor residual risks identify new risks ensure that risk response plans are executed at the appropriate time and evaluate their effectiveness throughout the project life cycle. in addition to tracking and managing the risk response actions the effectiveness of all of the project risk management processes should be reviewed to provide improvements to the management of the current project as well as future ones. for each risk or set of risks for which a contingent response has been defined the corresponding set of trigger conditions should have been specified. it is the responsibility of the action owner to ensure that these conditions are effectively monitored and that the corresponding actions are carried out as defined in a timely manner. once the plan risk responses process is complete all of the approved unconditional response actions should have been included and defined in the current project management plan. the first action of risk monitoring and controlling is to check whether this is the case and take any appropriate action if necessary such as invoking the change management process with respect to any missing actions. this will then ensure that the agreed upon actions are carried out within the normal project execution framework. the risk owners and risk action owners need to be briefed on any changes that may affect their responsibilities. effective communication needs to be maintained between them and the project manager so that the designated stakeholders accept accountability for controlling the potential outcomes of specific risks apply their best efforts to track the associated trigger conditions and carry out the agreed upon responses in a timely manner. in addition to the response actions and trigger conditions a mechanism for measuring the effectiveness of the response is provided by the plan risk responses process. the risk action owner should keep the risk owner aware of the status of the response actions so that the risk owner can decide when the risk has been effectively dealt with or whether additional actions need to be planned and implemented. chapter 9 monitor and control risks as the project progresses additional information becomes available and the project environment may change as some risks occur whether foreseen or unforeseen and others become or cease to be relevant. the planning should therefore be kept current and the project manager should ensure that periodic risk reassessment including risk identification analysis and response planning is repeated at reasonable intervals or in response to project events without generating excessive administrative overhead. typical reasons for risk reassessment are occurrence of a major or unexpected risk need to analyze a complex change request phase end review project re planning or major plan elaboration and periodic review to ensure that the information remains current. in the event of major organizational changes risk management planning may need to be revisited prior to reassessing the risks. in addition to the regular status reviews periodic audits should be performed to determine strengths and weaknesses in handling risks within the project. this should entail identifying any barriers to effectiveness or keys to success in risk management recognition of which could lead to improvements in risk management of the current or future projects. at the end of the project an integrated analysis of the risk management process should be carried out with a focus on long term process improvements. this analysis consolidates the findings of the periodic audits to identify lessons that would be applicable in general to a large proportion of the organization s projects in the future such as appropriate levels of resources adequate time for the analysis use of tools level of detail etc. at project closure the project manager should ensure that a description has been given of the closure of every risk in the risk register for example a did not occur b occurred and contingency plan invoked or c occurred and impact to the project scope i.e. time cost and quality . the output of the audit of the risk management process should be consolidated with specific information with respect to the project s experience of risks and any generally applicable guidelines for the organization should be highlighted and potential actions proposed for applying them. this can lead to an update to the corresponding organizational process assets. an overview of the steps involved in the monitor and control risks process is given in figure 9 1. chapter 9 monitor and control risks figure 9 1. schematic representation of the monitor and control risks process