--- Page 13 --- 
CHAPTER 1 
INTRODUCTION 
Project Management Institute (PMI) practice standards are guides to the use of a tool, technique, or process 
identifi ed in A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge ( PMBOK ® Guide – Fourth Edition) or 
other PMI standards. Practice standards are targeted at audiences who participate in the management of 
projects. This includes project managers, project personnel, contract personnel, supervisors, and other project 
stakeholders. 
A PMI practice standard describes processes, activities, inputs, and outputs for a specifi c Knowledge Area. 
It provides information on what the signifi cant process, tool, or technique is, what it does, why it is signifi cant, 
when it should be performed or executed, and, if necessary for further clarifi cation, who should perform the 
process. A practice standard does not prescribe how the process is to be implemented, leaving that subject for 
other forums such as handbooks, manuals, and courses. 
This chapter includes the following sections: 
1.1 Purpose of the Practice Standard for Project Risk Management 
1.2 Project Risk Management Defi nition 
1.3 Role of Project Risk Management in Project Management 
1.4 Good Risk Management Practice 
1.5 Critical Success Factors for Project Risk Management 
--- Page 14 --- 
CHAPTER 1 − INTRODUCTION 
1.1 Purpose of the Practice Standard for Project Risk Management 
The purpose of the Practice Standard for Project Risk Management is to ( a ) provide a standard for project 
management practitioners and other stakeholders that defi nes the aspects of Project Risk Management that 
are recognized as good practice on most projects most of the time and ( b ) provide a standard that is globally 
applicable and consistently applied. This practice standard has a descriptive purpose rather than one used for 
training or educational purposes. 
The Practice Standard for Project Risk Management covers risk management as it is applied to single 
projects only. Like the PMBOK ® Guide – Fourth Edition, this practice standard does not cover risk in programs 
or portfolios of projects. 
Chapter 11 of the PMBOK ® Guide – Fourth Edition, is the basis for the Practice Standard for Project Risk 
Management . This practice standard is consistent with that chapter, emphasizing the concepts and principles 
relating to Project Risk Management. It is aligned with other PMI practice standards. 
Figure 1-1 compares the purposes of this practice standard to those of the PMBOK ® Guide – Fourth Edition 
and textbooks, handbooks, and courses. 
Figure 1-1. Hierarchy of PMI Project Risk Management Resources 
--- Page 15 --- 
CHAPTER 1 − INTRODUCTION 
This practice standard is organized in three main sections: 
1. Introductory material including the framework, purpose, principles, context of, and introduction to 
Project Risk Management processes as defi ned in the PMBOK ® Guide – Fourth Edition. 
2. Principles underlying the six Project Risk Management processes in the PMBOK ® Guide – Fourth 
Edition. The six processes are as follows: 
Plan Risk Management, 
• 
Identify Risks, 
• 
Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis, 
• 
Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis, 
• 
Plan Risk Responses, and 
• 
Monitor and Control Risks. 
• 
Each of these six processes is described in a chapter that addresses the following four topics: 
( a ) purpose and objectives of the process; ( b ) critical success factors for the process; ( c ) tools and 
techniques for the process; and ( d ) documenting the results of the process. 
3. A glossary of terms which are used in this practice standard. 
This practice standard emphasizes those principles that are fundamental to effective, comprehensive, 
and successful Project Risk Management. These principles can and should be stated at a general level for 
several reasons: 
1. Principles are expected to be agreed upon now and to be valid in the future. While tools and 
techniques are constantly evolving, the principles have more stability and persistence. 
2. Different projects, organizations, and situations will require different approaches to Project Risk 
Management. In particular, risk management is a discipline that contains a series of processes to 
apply to both large and small projects. Risk management will be more effective if its practice is 
tailored to the project and congruent with the organizational culture, processes and assets. There 
are many different ways of conducting risk management that may comply with the principles of 
Project Risk Management as presented in this practice standard. 
3. The principles are applicable to projects carried out in a global context, refl ecting the many 
business and organizational arrangements between participants, for example, joint ventures 
between commercial and national companies, government and non-government organizations, 
and the cross-cultural environment often found on these project teams. 
The principles described herein can be used as a check for an organization’s processes. Practitioners can 
establish processes specifi c to their particular situation, project, or organization and then compare them with 
these principles, thus validating them against good Project Risk Management practice. 
--- Page 16 --- 
CHAPTER 1 − INTRODUCTION 
1.2 Project Risk Management Defi nition 
The defi nition of Project Risk Management, as defi ned in the PMBOK ® Guide – Fourth Edition, is the basis 
for this practice standard: “Project Risk Management includes the processes concerned with conducting 
risk management planning, identifi cation, analysis, responses, and monitoring and control on a project.” The 
PMBOK ® Guide – Fourth Edition also states: “The objectives of Project Risk Management are to increase the 
probability and impact of positive events, and decrease the probability and impact of negative events in the 
project.” In the PMBOK ® Guide – Fourth Edition, “project risk is an uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, 
has a positive or negative effect on a project’s objectives.” Project objectives include scope, schedule, cost, 
and quality. 
Project Risk Management aims to identify and prioritize risks in advance of their occurrence, and provide 
action-oriented information to project managers. This orientation requires consideration of events that may 
or may not occur and are therefore described in terms of likelihood or probability of occurrence in addition to 
other dimensions such as their impact on objectives. 
1.3 Role of Project Risk Management in Project Management 
Project Risk Management is not an optional activity: it is essential to successful project management. 
It should be applied to all projects and hence be included in project plans and operational documents. In 
this way, it becomes an integral part of every aspect of managing the project, in every phase and in every 
process group. 
Many of the project management processes address planning the project, from concept to fi nal design 
and from procurement through daily management of execution and close-out. These processes often 
assume an unrealistic degree of certainty about the project and, therefore, they need to include treatment of 
project risks. 
Project Risk Management addresses the uncertainty in project estimates and assumptions. Therefore, it 
builds upon and extends other project management processes. For instance, project scheduling provides dates 
and critical paths based on activity durations and resource availability assumed to be known with certainty. 
Quantitative risk analysis explores the uncertainty in the estimated durations and may provide alternative dates 
and critical paths that are more realistic given the risks to the project. 
Project Risk Management is not a substitute for the other project management processes. On the contrary, 
Project Risk Management requires that these project management processes (e.g. scheduling, budgeting, and 
change management) be performed at the level of the best practices available. Project Risk Management adds 
the perspective of project risk to the outputs of those other processes and adds to their value by taking risk 
into account. For instance, risk management provides the basis upon which to estimate the amount of cost and 
schedule contingency reserves that are needed to cover risk response actions to a required level of confi dence 
for meeting project objectives. 
--- Page 17 --- 
CHAPTER 1 − INTRODUCTION 
There is a paradox about project risk that affects most projects. In the early stages of a project, the level of 
risk exposure is at its maximum but information on the project risks is at a minimum. This situation does not 
mean that a project should not go forward because little is known at that time. Rather, there may be different 
ways of approaching the project that have different risk implications. The more this situation is recognized, the 
more realistic the project plans and expectations of results will be. 
A risk management approach is applicable throughout a project’s life cycle. The earlier in the project life 
cycle that the risks are recognized, the more realistic the project plans and expectations of results will be. Risk 
management continues to add value as project planning progresses and more information becomes available 
about all aspects and components of the project and its environment, such as stakeholders, scope, time, and 
cost, as well as the corresponding assumptions and constraints. The balance between project fl exibility and 
knowledge about project risk needs to be reviewed regularly and optimized as the plans develop. 
It is true that as the project plan becomes set with fundamental decisions, agreements, and contracts in 
place, the options for making substantial changes to capture opportunities or mitigate threats are reduced. 
During project execution, risk management processes monitor the changes the project undergoes for new 
risks that may emerge so that appropriate responses to them can be developed, as well as check for existing 
risks that are no longer plausible. Project Risk Management plays a role in providing realistic expectations for 
the completion dates and cost of the project even if there are few options for changing the future. 
Finally, throughout the project and during project closure, risk-related lessons are reviewed in order to 
contribute to organizational learning and support continuous improvement of Project Risk Management 
practice. 
1.4 Good Risk Management Practice 
Project Risk Management is a valuable component of project management and it enhances the value of 
the other project management processes. As with all of these processes, Project Risk Management should be 
conducted in a manner consistent with existing organizational practices and policies. In addition, like the other 
processes involved in project management, Project Risk Management should be conducted in a way that is 
appropriate to the project. Project Risk Management should recognize the business challenges as well as the 
multi-cultural environment associated with an increasingly global environment including many joint venture 
projects and customers, suppliers, and workforces spread around the globe. 
Changes in the project management plan that result from the Project Risk Management process may 
require decisions at the appropriate level of management to reassign personnel, establish or modify budgets, 
make commitments to others outside the project, interact with regulators, and comply with the rules of 
accounting and law. Project Risk Management should be conducted in compliance with these internal and 
external requirements. 
--- Page 18 --- 
CHAPTER 1 − INTRODUCTION 
Project Risk Management should always be conducted on an ethical basis, in keeping with the Project 
Management code of ethics or conduct. Honesty, responsibility, realism, professionalism and fair dealing 
with others are among the characteristics of successful Project Risk Management. Effective Project Risk 
Management benefi ts from robust communication and consultation with stakeholders. This enables agreement 
among stakeholders that Project Risk Management in general, and risk identifi cation, analysis, and response, 
in particular, should be carried out in a realistic and objective way and should not be subject to political or other 
unreasonable infl uences. 
Project Risk Management should be conducted on all projects. The degree, level of detail, sophistication of 
tools, and amount of time and resources applied to Project Risk Management should be in proportion to the 
characteristics of the project under management and the value that they can add to the outcome. Thus, a large 
project that provides value to an important customer would theoretically require more resources, time, and 
attention to Project Risk Management than would a smaller, short-term, internal project that can be conducted 
in the background with a fl exible deadline. 
Each of the Project Risk Management processes should be scaled to be appropriate to the project under 
management during the Plan Risk Management process and reviewed periodically to determine if the decisions 
made in that process remain appropriate. 
1.5 Critical Success Factors for Project Risk Management 
Figure 1-2. Critical Success Factors for Project Risk Management 
--- Page 19 --- 
CHAPTER 1 − INTRODUCTION 
Specifi c criteria for success of each Project Risk Management process are listed in the chapters dealing 
with those processes. The general criteria for success include: 
• Recognize the Value of Risk Management — Project Risk Management should be recognized 
as a valuable discipline that provides a positive potential return on investment for organizational 
management, project stakeholders (both internal and external), project management, and team 
members. 
• Individual Commitment/Responsibility — Project participants and stakeholders should all accept 
responsibility for undertaking risk-related activities as required. Risk management is everybody’s 
responsibility. 
• Open and Honest Communication — Everyone should be involved in the Project Risk Management 
process. Any actions or attitudes that hinder communication about project risk reduce the effectiveness 
of Project Risk Management in terms of proactive approaches and effective decision-making. 
• Organizational Commitment — Organizational commitment can only be established if risk 
management is aligned with the organization’s goals and values. Project Risk Management may 
require a higher level of managerial support than other project management disciplines because 
handling some of the risks will require approval of or responses from others at levels above the 
project manager. 
• Risk Effort Scaled to Project — Project Risk Management activities should be consistent with the value 
of the project to the organization and with its level of project risk, its scale, and other organizational 
constraints. In particular, the cost of Project Risk Management should be appropriate to its potential 
value to the project and the organization. 
• Integration with Project Management — Project Risk Management does not exist in a vacuum, 
isolated from other project management processes. Successful Project Risk Management requires 
the correct execution of the other project management processes. 
These critical success factors for Project Risk Management are illustrated in Figure 1-2. 
1.6 Conclusion 
The principles of Project Risk Management described in this practice standard should be appropriately 
applied based on the specifi cs of a project and the organizational environment. Project Risk Management 
provides benefi ts when it is implemented according to good practice principles and with organizational 
commitment to taking the decisions and performing actions in an open and unbiased manner. 
--- Page 21 --- 
CHAPTER 2 
PRINCIPLES AND CONCEPTS 
2.1 Introduction 
This chapter introduces the key ideas required to understand and apply Project Risk Management to projects 
following the approach described in Chapter 11 of the PMBOK ® Guide – Fourth Edition. These principles and 
concepts are generally consistent with other approaches to Project Risk Management commonly used although 
the terminology may differ in some details. 
The execution of the Project Risk Management process is dealt with in subsequent chapters of this practice 
standard and so is not discussed here. 
2.2 Defi nition of Project Risk 
The word “risk” is used in many ways in everyday language and in various specialist disciplines. Its use 
in the PMBOK ® Guide – Fourth Edition is consistent with other risk management standards and process 
descriptions. The defi nition of project risk given in the PMBOK ® Guide – Fourth Edition is as follows: 
Project risk is an uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has a positive or a negative 
effect on a project’s objectives. 
This defi nition includes two key dimensions of risk: uncertainty and effect on a project’s objectives. When 
assessing the importance of a project risk, these two dimensions must both be considered. The uncertainty 
dimension may be described using the term “probability” and the effect may be called “impact” (though other 
descriptors are possible, such as “likelihood” and “consequence”). 
The defi nition of risk includes both distinct events which are uncertain but can be clearly described, and 
more general conditions which are less specifi c but also may give risk to uncertainty. The defi nition of project 
risk also encompasses uncertain events which could have a negative effect on a project’s objectives, as 
well as those which could have a positive effect. These two types of risk are called, respectively, threats and 
opportunities. It is important to address both threats and opportunities within a unifi ed Project Risk Management 
process. This allows for the gain of synergies and effi ciencies such as addressing both in the same analyses 
and coordinating the responses to both if they overlap or can reinforce each other. 
--- Page 22 --- 
CHAPTER 2 − PRINCIPLES AND CONCEPTS 
Risks are uncertain future events or conditions which may or may not occur, but which would matter if they 
did occur. It is important to distinguish risks from risk-related features, such as cause and effect. Causes are 
events or circumstances which currently exist or are certain to exist in the future and which might give rise 
to risks. Effects are conditional future events or conditions which would directly affect one or more project 
objectives if the associated risk occurs. The cause-risk-effect chain can be used in a structured risk statement 
or risk description to ensure that each of these three elements is properly described (see Section 5.3). 
When a risk event occurs, it ceases to become uncertain. Threats which occur may be called issues or 
problems; opportunities which occur may be called benefi ts. Both issues/problems and benefi ts entail project 
management actions that are outside the scope of the Project Risk Management process. 
2.3 Individual Risks and Overall Project Risk 
It is useful to consider project risk at two levels: individual risks and overall project risk. 
Individual risks are specifi c events or conditions that might affect project objectives. An individual risk 
may positively or negatively affect one or more of the project objectives, elements, or tasks. Understanding 
individual risks can assist in determining how to apply effort and resources to enhance the chances of project 
success. Day-to-day Project Risk Management focuses on these individual risks in order to enhance the 
prospects of a successful project outcome. 
Overall project risk represents the effect of uncertainty on the project as a whole. Overall project risk is 
more than the sum of individual risks on a project, since it applies to the whole project rather than to individual 
elements or tasks. It represents the exposure of stakeholders to the implications of variations in project 
outcome. It is an important component of strategic decision-making, program and portfolio management, 
and project governance where investments are sanctioned or cancelled and priorities are set. At these higher 
levels, it is necessary to set realistic targets for the cost and duration of a project, establish the contingency 
reserve levels required to protect the project stakeholders, set appropriate project priorities, and judge whether 
the risk of overall success is increasing or decreasing as implementation advances. 
2.4 Stakeholder Risk Attitudes 
The risk attitudes of the project stakeholders determine the extent to which an individual risk or overall 
project risk matters. A wide range of factors infl uence risk attitude. These include the scale of the project 
within the range of stakeholders’ overall activities, the strength of public commitments made about the 
performance of the project, and the stakeholders’ sensitivity to issues such as environmental impacts, 
industrial relations, and other factors. Stakeholder risk attitudes usually result in a desire for increased 
certainty in project outcomes, and may express a preference for one project objective over another. How risk 
is regarded is usually also strongly infl uenced by an organization’s culture. Different organizations are more 
or less open, and this often impacts the way risk management can be applied. 
--- Page 23 --- 
CHAPTER 2 − PRINCIPLES AND CONCEPTS 
Understanding stakeholders’ attitudes toward risk is an important component of risk management planning 
that precedes risk identifi cation and analysis, in order to optimize both project success and stakeholder 
satisfaction with the project’s results. These attitudes should be identifi ed and managed proactively and 
deliberately throughout the Project Risk Management process. They may differ from one project to another 
for the same stakeholders and will usually differ from one group of stakeholders to another. In fact a single 
stakeholder may adopt different risk attitudes at various stages in the same project. 
It is also important to understand the particular implications of stakeholder risk attitudes on projects where 
the team is international, cross-industry, or multi-organizational. 
2.5 Iterative Process 
It is the nature of projects that circumstances change as they are being planned and executed. The amount 
of information available about risks will usually increase as time goes on. Some risks will occur while others will 
not, new risks will arise or be discovered, and the characteristics of those already identifi ed may change. As a 
result, the Project Risk Management processes should be repeated and the corresponding plans progressively 
elaborated throughout the lifetime of the project. 
To ensure that Project Risk Management remains effective, the identifi cation and analysis of risks should 
be revisited periodically, the progress on risk response actions should be monitored, and the action plans 
adjusted accordingly. If external circumstances change signifi cantly, it may also be necessary to revisit the risk 
management planning process. 
The development of an initial risk management plan and risk assessment is the start of the process, not 
the end. The frequency and depth of reviews and updates will depend on the nature of the project, the volatility 
of the environment in which the project is being implemented, and the timing of other project management 
reviews and updates. 
2.6 Communication 
Project Risk Management cannot take place in isolation. Success relies heavily on communication 
throughout the process. 
Risk identifi cation and analysis depend on comprehensive input from stakeholders in a project to ensure 
that nothing signifi cant is overlooked and that risks are realistically assessed. The credibility of the process 
and the commitment of those who should act to manage risks can be assured only if the way the process 
operates and the conclusions it produces are understood and seen as credible by all concerned. This demands 
effective and honest communication from the Project Risk Management process to the rest of the project team 
and other project stakeholders. Communication of the results of the Project Risk Management process should 
be targeted to meet the specifi c needs of each stakeholder and should be refl ected within the overall project 
communications strategy with each stakeholder’s responsibility and role in risk management identifi ed and 
agreed-upon. 
--- Page 24 --- 
CHAPTER 2 − PRINCIPLES AND CONCEPTS 
2.7 Responsibility for Project Risk Management 
It may be considered simplistic to say “risk management is everyone’s responsibility” as previously stated. 
However it is important that management of project risk is not left to a few risk specialists. Project Risk 
Management should be included as an integral part of all other project processes. Since project risks can 
affect project objectives, anyone with an interest in achieving those objectives should play a role in Project Risk 
Management. The specifi c roles depend on the project team members’ and other stakeholders’ place within 
the project and their relation to project objectives. Roles and responsibilities for Project Risk Management 
should be clearly defi ned and communicated, and individuals should be held responsible and accountable 
for results. This includes allocating responsibility for specifi c activities within the risk process, as well as for 
resulting actions required to implement agreed-upon responses. Responsibility should also be allocated for 
ensuring that risk-related lessons are captured for future use. 
2.8 Project Manager’s Role for Project Risk Management 
The project manager has particular responsibilities in relation to the Project Risk Management process. 
The project manager has overall responsibility for delivering a successful project which fully meets the defi ned 
objectives. The project manager is accountable for the day-to-day management of the project, including 
effective risk management. The role of the project manager may include: 
Encouraging senior management support for Project Risk Management activities. 
• 
Determining the acceptable levels of risk for the project in consultation with stakeholders. 
• 
Developing and approving the risk management plan. 
• 
Promoting the Project Risk Management process for the project. 
• 
Facilitating open and honest communication about risk within the project team and with 
• 
management and other stakeholders. 
Participating in all aspects of the Project Risk Management process. 
• 
Approving risk responses and associated actions prior to implementation. 
• 
Applying project contingency funds to deal with identifi ed risks that occur during the project. 
• 
Overseeing risk management by subcontractors and suppliers. 
• 
Regularly reporting risk status to key stakeholders, with recommendations for appropriate strategic 
• 
decisions and actions to maintain acceptable risk exposure. 
Escalating identifi ed risks to senior management where appropriate: such risks include any which are 
• 
outside the authority or control of the project manager, any which require input or action from outside 
the project, and any for which the release of management reserve funds might be appropriate. 
Monitoring the effi ciency and effectiveness of the Project Risk Management process. 
• 
Auditing risk responses for their effectiveness and documenting lessons learned. 
• 
--- Page 25 --- 
CHAPTER 3 
INTRODUCTION TO PROJECT RISK MANAGEMENT PROCESSES 
3.1 Project Risk Management and Project Management 
All projects are uncertain. Uncertainty is inevitable since projects are unique and temporary undertakings 
based on assumptions and constraints, delivering project results to multiple stakeholders with different 
requirements. Project management can be seen as an attempt to control this uncertain environment, through 
the use of structured and disciplined techniques such as estimating, planning, cost control, task allocation, 
earned value analysis, monitoring and review meetings, etc. Each of these elements of project management 
has a role in defi ning or controlling the uncertainty which is inherent in all projects. 
Project Risk Management provides an approach by which uncertainty can be understood, assessed, and 
managed within projects. As such it forms an integral part of project management, and effective Project Risk 
Management is a critical success factor for project success. 
For project management to be fully effective, however, it is important that Project Risk Management is not 
viewed as an optional process or performed as an additional overhead task. Since many elements of project 
management address inherent uncertainty, the interface between structured Project Risk Management and the 
other processes of project management needs to be clear. The outputs of Project Risk Management should be 
taken into account within many of the project management processes. They can, for example, impact: 
Estimating resource requirements, cost, or duration; 
• 
Assessing the impact of proposed scope changes; 
• 
Planning or re-planning the forward strategy of the project; 
• 
Allocating resources to tasks; and 
• 
Reporting progress to stakeholders. 
• 
None of these actions can be performed properly without a clear view of the risk involved, as determined 
during the Project Risk Management process. In other words, project management process effectiveness is 
increased by using the information and results from Project Risk Management. 
In addition, effective Project Risk Management requires input from other project management processes. 
Outputs such as the work breakdown structure (WBS), estimates, the project schedule, assumptions list, etc. 
are all important prerequisites for effective Project Risk Management. 
--- Page 26 --- 
CHAPTER 3 − INTRODUCTION TO PROJECT RISK MANAGEMENT PROCESSES 
3.2 Project Risk Management Processes 
The defi ned steps of Project Risk Management describe a structured approach for understanding and 
managing risk on a project. This chapter outlines the steps required for effective Project Risk Management. 
Each step is described in more detail in subsequent chapters. 
As previously defi ned, project risk is an uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has a positive or 
negative effect on a project’s objectives. From this defi nition, it is clear that risks only exist in relation to 
objectives. It is therefore essential at the start of the Project Risk Management process to clearly defi ne the 
objectives. It is also clear that different projects are exposed to different levels of risk, so each step in the 
Project Risk Management process should be scalable to meet the varying degrees of risk. Scalable elements 
of the process include: 
Available resources, 
• 
Methodology and processes used, 
• 
Tools and techniques used, 
• 
Supporting infrastructure, 
• 
Review and update frequency, and 
• 
Reporting requirements. 
• 
As a precondition for a successful Project Risk Management implementation, it is important to have a clear 
understanding of the risk thresholds that defi ne the key stakeholders’ views on acceptable levels of risk, as 
well as a framework against which identifi ed risks can be assessed. 
As a result, the Project Risk Management process always starts with an initiation step. This is required in 
order to ensure a common understanding and agreement of the team and other stakeholders on the approach 
and parameters that will be applied in managing risk in this project, as well as the scope and objectives of the 
Project Risk Management process itself. Project Risk Management activities, resources, and attention should 
be appropriate to the project since different projects warrant different levels of risk management application. 
The main actions to provide the required tailoring are as follows: 
Defi ne those objectives against which risks will be identifi ed, 
• 
Defi ne how the elements of the Project Risk Management process will be scaled for this 
• 
project, and 
Defi ne risk thresholds, tolerances, and the assessment framework. 
• 
The outputs from this initial step should be documented, communicated, and then reviewed by the 
stakeholders to ensure a common understanding of the scope and objectives for the Project Risk Management 
process. The document should be formally approved at a senior level. 
--- Page 27 --- 
CHAPTER 3 − INTRODUCTION TO PROJECT RISK MANAGEMENT PROCESSES 
Once the Project Risk Management scope and objectives are agreed upon, it is possible to start identifying 
risks, being careful to distinguish genuine risks from non-risks (such as causes, effects, problems, issues etc.). 
A variety of risk identifi cation techniques is available, each with its own strengths and weaknesses. One or 
more techniques should be selected as appropriate for meeting the needs of the specifi c project. The aim is 
to expose and document all knowable risks, recognizing that some risks will be inherently unknowable and 
others will emerge later in the project. The emergent nature of risk requires the Project Risk Management 
process to be iterative, repeating the Identify Risks process in order to fi nd risks which were not evident earlier 
in the project. Input should be sought from a wide range of project stakeholders when identifying risks, since 
each will have a different perspective on the risks facing the project. Historical records and project documents 
should also be reviewed to identify risks for this project. 
All identifi ed risks are recorded. Ideally, a risk owner is designated for each identifi ed risk. It is the 
responsibility of the risk owner to manage the corresponding risk through all of the subsequent Project Risk 
Management processes. 
Following risk identifi cation, it is necessary to evaluate the importance of each risk, in order to prioritize 
individual risks for further attention, evaluate the level of overall project risk, and determine appropriate 
responses. Risk evaluation can be performed using qualitative techniques to address individual risks, using 
quantitative techniques to consider the overall effect of risk on the project outcome, or using both in combination. 
These two approaches require different types of data, but where both qualitative and quantitative techniques 
are used, an integrated approach should be adopted. 
Qualitative techniques are used to gain a better understanding of individual risks, considering a range 
of characteristics such as probability of occurrence, degree of impact on project objectives, manageability, 
timing of possible impacts, relationships with other risks, common causes or effects, etc. Understanding and 
prioritizing risks is an essential prerequisite to managing them, so qualitative techniques are used on most 
projects. The outputs from qualitative assessments should be documented and communicated to key project 
stakeholders and form a basis for determining appropriate responses. 
Quantitative techniques provide insights into the combined effect of identifi ed risks on the project outcome. 
These techniques take into account probabilistic or project-wide effects, such as correlation between risks, 
interdependency, and feedback loops, thereby indicating the degree of overall risk faced by the project. The 
result is an indication of the degree of overall risk faced by the project. The results of quantitative analysis 
should be used to focus the development of appropriate responses, particularly the calculation of required 
contingency reserve levels, and must be documented and communicated to inform subsequent actions. 
Quantitative techniques may not be required for all projects to ensure effective management of risk. 
--- Page 28 --- 
CHAPTER 3 − INTRODUCTION TO PROJECT RISK MANAGEMENT PROCESSES 
Once individual risks have been prioritized and the degree of overall project risk exposure is understood, 
appropriate risk responses should be developed using an iterative process which continues until an optimal 
set of responses has been developed. A range of possible response strategies exists for both threats and 
opportunities. The risk owner should select a suitable strategy for each individual risk, based on its characteristics 
and assessed priority, ensuring that the strategy is achievable, affordable, cost effective, and appropriate. The 
use of a single strategy that addresses several related risks should be considered whenever possible. The risk 
owner is responsible for defi ning actions to implement the chosen strategy. These actions may be delegated to 
action owners as appropriate. The risk owner should monitor actions to determine their effectiveness, and also 
to identify any secondary risks which may arise because of the implementation of risk responses. In addition 
to individual risk responses, actions may be taken to respond to overall project risk. All response strategies 
and actions should be documented and communicated to key project stakeholders and incorporated into the 
project plan. 
It is essential that agreed-upon actions are implemented; otherwise the risk exposure of the project remains 
unchanged. It is also vital that the Project Risk Management process be repeated at regular intervals throughout 
the life of the project. This will enable the project team to reevaluate the status of previously identifi ed risks, 
to identify emergent and secondary risks, and to determine the effectiveness of the Project Risk Management 
process. 
The steps outlined previously form the Project Risk Management process. These are detailed in subsequent 
chapters, as follows: 
• Plan Risk Management (Chapter 4) — Defi nes the scope and objectives of the Project Risk 
Management process, and ensures that the risk process is fully integrated into wider project 
management. 
• Identify Risks (Chapter 5) — Identifi es as many knowable risks as practicable. 
• Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis (Chapter 6) — Evaluates key characteristics of individual risks 
enabling them to be prioritized for further action. 
• Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis (Chapter 7) — Evaluates the combined effect of risks on the 
overall project outcome. 
• Plan Risk Responses (Chapter 8) — Determines appropriate response strategies and actions for 
each individual risk and for overall project risk, and integrates them into a consolidated project 
management plan. 
• Monitor and Control Risks (Chapter 9) — Implements agreed-upon actions, reviews changes in 
project risk exposure, identifi es additional risk management actions as required, and assesses the 
effectiveness of the Project Risk Management process. 
Figure 3-1 shows the fl ow of control and information between the various steps within the Project Risk 
Management process. 
--- Page 29 --- 
CHAPTER 3 − INTRODUCTION TO PROJECT RISK MANAGEMENT PROCESSES 
Figure 3-1. Project Risk Management Process Flow Diagram 
--- Page 31 --- 
CHAPTER 4 
PLAN RISK MANAGEMENT 
4.1 Purpose and Objectives of the Plan Risk Management Process 
The objectives of the Plan Risk Management process are to develop the overall risk management strategy 
for the project, to decide how the risk management processes will be executed, and to integrate Project Risk 
Management with all other project management activities. 
Effective risk management requires creation of a risk management plan. This plan describes how the 
risk management processes should be carried out and how they fi t in with the other project management 
processes. On a broader level, it describes the relationships among Project Risk Management, general project 
management, and the management processes in the rest of the organization. To provide the greatest benefi t, 
initial risk management planning should be carried out early in the overall planning of the project, and the 
corresponding risk management activities integrated into the overall project management plan. The risk 
management plan may subsequently need to be adapted as the needs of the project and its stakeholders 
become clearer or change. 
Although the Project Risk Management processes form an integral part of the overall project management 
plan, a budget in terms of resources, cost, and time for the specifi c risk management activities should be 
established in order to better track, control, and, as necessary, defend the corresponding expenditures 
throughout the project. The cost of treating the risks themselves should be included appropriately in the project 
budget, while the risk management plan should describe how this part of the project budget is evaluated, 
allocated, and managed. The risk management plan will defi ne the monitoring methods to ensure that the 
corresponding expenditures are tracked appropriately, as well as the conditions under which the approved 
budget for risk management can be modifi ed. 
In the same way that project management is a process of progressive elaboration, risk management 
activities need to be repeated throughout the project. The risk management plan should defi ne both the 
normal frequency for repeating the processes as well as specifi c or exceptional conditions under which the 
corresponding actions should be initiated. The corresponding risk management activities should be integrated 
into the project management plan. 
There are two categories of success criteria for risk management: those for success of the project in 
general, and those for success of Project Risk Management. 
--- Page 32 --- 
CHAPTER 4 − PLAN RISK MANAGEMENT 
• Project-Related Criteria. To assess the success of Project Risk Management, the stakeholders 
must agree on an acceptable level of results for the project-related criteria (such as cost, time, and 
scope). In order to ensure consistency and agreement among stakeholders, the risk management 
plan should present these objectives with reference to the project defi nition documents. To provide 
guidance in risk management, particularly in prioritizing risk responses, stakeholders should also 
prioritize each project objective. 
• Process-Related Criteria. The measures for success in Project Risk Management depend on a 
number of factors, such as the inherent level of uncertainty of the project. For example, the Project 
Risk Management process for a research project needs to address more unforeseen changes than 
for a project with a more predictable environment. A research Project Risk Management process 
may be considered a success even if it results in more variance from the baseline than would be 
allowable for a successful process in a more predictable project. 
The level of risk that is considered acceptable in a project depends on the risk attitudes of the relevant 
stakeholders. The risk attitudes of both the organization and the stakeholders may be infl uenced by a number 
of factors, all of which need to be identifi ed. These include their inherent tolerance for uncertainty, and the 
relative importance to them of achieving or missing specifi c project objectives. The output of this analysis 
should then be taken into account for setting thresholds and providing weighting factors when applying the 
Project Risk Management processes in the specifi c project. 
Guidelines and rules for escalating risk-related information to management and other stakeholders should 
refl ect the risk attitudes and expectations of the corresponding stakeholders. The project manager should 
maintain effective communication with the stakeholders as the project evolves, in order to become aware of 
any changes in the stakeholders’ attitudes and adapt the risk management approach to take any new facts 
into account. 
It is important that the participants share a common understanding of all terms used to describe the risks, 
and that the critical values and thresholds that will serve as parameters for the tools should be defi ned in a 
manner consistent with the scope of the project and the attitudes of the stakeholders. If qualitative analysis 
uses such terms as “high impact” or “medium probability,” these should be defi ned objectively in the risk 
management plan. Similarly, the risk management plan should specify any key numerical values required in 
quantitative analysis or for decision-making in risk response planning or risk monitoring and control. 
Risk management planning should establish the type and level of risk detail to be addressed and provide a 
template of the risk register that will be used for recording risk-related information. The risk management plan 
should also indicate the intensity of effort and the frequency with which the various Project Risk Management 
processes should be applied; this depends on the characteristics of the project as well as on the specifi ed risk 
management objectives. 
In order for the Project Risk Management processes to be carried out correctly and effectively, the project 
team and other stakeholders need to know where and when they will be expected to participate, their criteria 
for determining success, their level of authority, and what action to take relative to actions or decisions beyond 
this level. The risk management plan specifi es the project’s risk management roles and responsibilities and 
defi nes the corresponding expectations for both senior management and project personnel. 
--- Page 33 --- 
CHAPTER 4 − PLAN RISK MANAGEMENT 
Risk-related communication occurs at two levels: (a) within the project team, and (b) between the project 
team and the other project stakeholders. The principles for each of these categories of communication are 
defi ned in the risk management plan. For the team, the plan describes the frequency and scope of the various 
risk management meetings and reports required to carry out the corresponding Project Risk Management 
processes as well as the structure and content of such meetings and reports. For the other stakeholders, the 
plan sets their expectations as to the structure, content, and frequency of routine documents to be received 
as well as the way in which information will be shared for escalation or exceptional events. Details of the 
information required by the project team from stakeholders should also be clearly defi ned. 
4.2 Critical Success Factors for the Plan Risk Management Process 
The principal criteria for a valid risk management plan are acceptance by the stakeholders, alignment 
with the internal and external constraints on the project, balance between cost or effort and benefi t, and 
completeness with respect to the needs of the Project Risk Management process. Critical success factors for 
the Plan Risk Management process are detailed below. 
4.2.1 Identify and Address Barriers to Successful Project Risk Management 
The time and effort required to carry out the Plan Risk Management process will not be supported unless 
the stakeholders, and especially management in the organization responsible for the project, recognize and 
accept the benefi ts of managing risk, and the added value of addressing this as a skill in its own right rather 
than as a passive or reactive component of general project management. 
A clear defi nition of the project objectives and a high-level view of the project environment and solution 
approach are required to provide a valid basis for risk management. The project manager should therefore 
ensure that valid defi nition and planning information is available for the plan risk management activity. 
An organization inexperienced in risk management planning may need to develop its own approach and 
may expend an inappropriate amount of time and effort on this. Alternatively it may use a proprietary or 
pre-existing approach which requires tailoring. The availability of some or all of the following organizational 
process assets contributes to the chances of success of the Plan Risk Management activities: standard 
templates, predefi ned risk categories, and an established project management methodology incorporating 
risk management procedures that specify what risk information is required for decision making, when it is 
required, and a defi nition of concepts and terms, roles, responsibilities, and authority levels. Access to relevant 
lessons learned at this stage will allow this experience to be taken into account from the start of the project. 
The risk management plan will not deliver its value unless Project Risk Management is carried out as 
an integral part of the project. The corresponding activities should be built into the project work breakdown 
structure and included in the corresponding schedule, budget, and work-assignment documents. 
--- Page 34 --- 
CHAPTER 4 − PLAN RISK MANAGEMENT 
4.2.2 Involve Project Stakeholders in Project Risk Management 
The project manager needs to involve the project stakeholders in the Plan Risk Management activities to 
build on their skills and experience as well as to ensure their understanding of, and commitment to, the full 
Project Risk Management process. 
The provision for risk management resources specifi ed within the risk management plan should be 
approved by management at a level adequate for carrying out the required Project Risk Management processes 
in accordance with agreed-upon objectives. Management should be involved in the analysis of the level of 
resourcing required for managing project risk and accept the risks that may arise from specifi c limitations 
placed on the provision of resources. Disagreements between stakeholders in the areas of risk tolerance and 
evaluation measures should be addressed and resolved. 
4.2.3 Comply with the Organization’s Objectives, Policies, and Practices 
The feasibility of risk management planning is dependent upon the features of the organization in which 
it is carried out. The rules and guidelines defi ned in the risk management plan should be compatible with the 
culture of the organization, its capabilities from the point of view of people and facilities, and its values, goals, 
and objectives. 
Project management in general, and risk management in particular, contribute to the organization’s effective 
governance. The risk management plan should identify and take into account the relevant organizational 
procedures and any other enterprise environmental factors that apply such as strategic risk management or 
corporate governance processes. 
4.3 Tools and Techniques for the Plan Risk Management Process 
4.3.1 Planning Sessions 
Planning sessions are recommended in order to build a common understanding of the project’s risk approach 
between project stakeholders and to gain agreement on the techniques to be used for managing risk. 
Elaboration of the risk management plan often serves to develop an effective means for the team to work 
together since a similar consultative team approach will be used in subsequent stages of the risk management 
process. The participants should include: the project manager, selected project team members and other 
stakeholders, members of the broader organization having responsibility for risk, and other subject matter 
experts or facilitators, as needed. 
At this point, the initial risk responsibilities, methodology, templates, terms, defi nitions, time schedules, and 
cost budgets for the other Project Risk Management processes should be assigned and accepted. The specifi cation 
for the tools that will be used in subsequent processes should include all parameters and other inputs required 
to ensure their applicability to the specifi c project. These should be documented in the risk management plan, 
which, when formally approved, is the principal deliverable of the Plan Risk Management process. 
--- Page 35 --- 
CHAPTER 4 − PLAN RISK MANAGEMENT 
4.3.2 Templates 
In order to benefi t from experience and existing best practice, risk management planning should take into 
account relevant existing templates for work products, such as risk status reports, risk breakdown structures 
or the risk register. A decision should be made as to which templates are relevant to the project, and these 
should then be adapted and included in the risk management plan. 
4.4 Documenting the Results of the Plan Risk Management Process 
The results of risk management planning are documented in the risk management plan. The plan serves 
to provide all project stakeholders with a common view of how the risk-related activities of the project will be 
handled, what has been agreed upon, and a description of the stakeholders’ involvement and responsibilities 
in these activities. An overview of the key areas of focus is given in Figure 4-1. 
Figure 4-1. Key Areas of Focus for the Plan Risk Management Process 
Depending upon the size and complexity of the project, some or all of the following elements will be present 
in a risk management plan. 
Introduction; 
• 
Project description; 
• 
Risk management methodology; 
• 
Risk management organization; 
• 
Roles, responsibilities, and authority; 
• 
Stakeholder risk tolerance; 
• 
Criteria for success; 
• 
Risk management tools and guidelines for use; 
• 
Thresholds and corresponding defi nitions; 
• 
Templates; 
• 
Communications plan; 
• 
Strategy; and 
• 
Risk breakdown structure. 
• 
--- Page 37 --- 
CHAPTER 5 
IDENTIFY RISKS 
5.1 Purpose and Objectives of the Identify Risks Process 
A risk cannot be managed unless it is fi rst identifi ed. Consequently, after risk management planning has 
been completed, the fi rst process in the iterative Project Risk Management process aims to identify all the 
knowable risks to project objectives. 
It is, however, impossible to identify all the risks at the outset of a project. Over time, the level of project 
risk exposure changes as a result of the decisions and actions taken previously in the project (internal change) 
and of externally imposed change. 
The purpose of risk identifi cation is to identify risks to the maximum extent that is practicable. The fact that 
some risks are unknowable or emergent requires the Identify Risk process to be iterative, repeating the Identify 
Risks process to fi nd new risks which have become knowable since the previous iteration of the process. 
When a risk is fi rst identifi ed, potential responses may also be identifi ed at the same time. These should be 
recorded during the Identify Risks process and considered for immediate action if such action is appropriate. 
Where such responses are not implemented immediately, these should be considered during the Plan Risk 
Responses process. 
5.2 Critical Success Factors for the Identify Risks Process 
The practices described in Sections 5.2.1 through 5.2.10 will maximize the value and effectiveness of the 
Identify Risks process and enhance the likelihood of identifying as many risks as practicable. 
5.2.1 Early Identifi cation 
Risk identifi cation should be performed as early as possible in the project lifecycle, recognizing the paradox 
that uncertainty is high in the initial stages of a project so there is often less information on which to base the 
risk identifi cation. Early risk identifi cation enables key project decisions to take maximum account of risks 
inherent in the project, and may result in changes to the project strategy. It also maximizes the time available 
for development and implementation of risk responses, which enhances effi ciency since responses taken early 
are often normally less costly than later ones. 
--- Page 38 --- 
CHAPTER 5 − IDENTIFY RISKS 
5.2.2 Iterative Identifi cation 
Since not all risks can be identifi ed at any given point in the project, it is essential that risk identifi cation is 
repeated throughout the project life cycle. This should be done periodically, at a frequency determined during 
the Plan Risk Management process. Risk identifi cation might also be repeated at key milestones in the project, 
or whenever there is signifi cant change to the project or its operating environment. 
5.2.3 Emergent Identifi cation 
In addition to invoking the Identify Risks process as defi ned in the project plan, the Project Risk Management 
process should permit risks to be identifi ed at any time, not limited to formal risk identifi cation events or 
regular reviews. 
5.2.4 Comprehensive Identifi cation 
A broad range of sources of risk should be considered to ensure that as many uncertainties as possible that 
might affect objectives have been identifi ed. 
5.2.5 Explicit Identifi cation of Opportunities 
The Identify Risks process should ensure opportunities are properly considered. 
5.2.6 Multiple Perspectives 
The Identify Risks process should take input from a broad range of project stakeholders to ensure that 
all perspectives are represented and considered. Limiting risk identifi cation to the immediate project team is 
unlikely to expose all knowable risks. 
5.2.7 Risks Linked to Project Objectives 
Each identifi ed project risk should relate to at least one project objective (time, cost, quality, scope, etc.), 
noting that the PMBOK ® Guide defi nes risk as an uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has a positive 
or a negative effect on a project’s objectives. Consideration of each project objective during the Identify Risks 
process will assist in identifying risks, noting that some risks may affect more than one objective. 
5.2.8 Complete Risk Statement 
Identifi ed risks should be clearly and unambiguously described, so that they can be understood by those 
responsible for risk assessment and risk response planning. Single words or phrases such as “resources” 
or “logistics” are inadequate and do not properly communicate the nature of the risk. More detailed risk 
descriptions are required which explicitly state the uncertainty and its causes and effects. 
--- Page 39 --- 
CHAPTER 5 − IDENTIFY RISKS 
5.2.9 Ownership and Level of Detail 
Risks can be identifi ed at a number of levels of detail. A generalized or high-level description of risk can 
make it diffi cult to develop responses and assign ownership, while describing risks in a lot of detail can create 
a great deal of work. Each risk should be described at a level of detail at which it can be assigned to a single 
risk owner with clear responsibility and accountability for its management. Trigger conditions should also be 
identifi ed where this is possible and appropriate. 
5.2.10 Objectivity 
All human activities are susceptible to bias, especially when dealing with uncertainty. Both motivational 
biases, where someone is trying to bias the result in one direction or another, or cognitive biases, where 
biases occur as people are using their best judgment and applying heuristics, may occur. This should be 
explicitly recognized and addressed during the Identify Risks process. Sources of bias should be exposed 
wherever possible, and their effect on the risk process should be managed proactively. The aim is to minimize 
subjectivity, and allow open and honest identifi cation of as many risks as possible to the project. 
5.3 Tools and Techniques for the Identify Risks Process 
A range of tools and techniques is available for risk identifi cation. These fall into the following three 
categories, as illustrated in Figure 5-1: 
Figure 5-1. Three Perspectives of Risk Identification 
--- Page 40 --- 
CHAPTER 5 − IDENTIFY RISKS 
5.3.1 Historical Review 
Historical reviews are based on what occurred in the past, either on this project, or other similar projects 
in the same organization, or comparable projects in other organizations. Historical review approaches rely on 
careful selection of comparable situations which are genuinely similar to the current project, and fi ltering of 
data to ensure that only relevant previous risks are considered. In each case, the risks identifi ed in the selected 
historical situation should be considered, asking whether they or similar risks might arise in this project. 
5.3.2 Current Assessments 
Current assessments rely on detailed consideration of the current project, analyzing its characteristics 
against given frameworks and models in order to expose areas of uncertainty. Unlike historical review 
approaches, current assessment techniques do not rely on outside reference points, but are based purely on 
examination of the project. 
5.3.3 Creativity Techniques 
A wide range of creativity techniques can be used for risk identifi cation, which encourages project 
stakeholders to use their imagination to fi nd risks which might affect the project. The outcomes or effectiveness 
of these techniques depend on the ability of participants to think creatively. These techniques can be used 
either singly or in groups, and employ varying degrees of structure. These techniques depend on the ability of 
participants to think creatively, and their success is enhanced by use of a skilled facilitator. 
Each category of risk identifi cation technique has strengths and weaknesses, and no single technique 
can be expected to reveal all knowable risks. Consequently, the Identify Risks process for a particular project 
should use a combination of techniques, perhaps selecting one from each category. For example, a project may 
choose to use a risk identifi cation checklist (historical review), together with assumptions analysis (current 
assessment) and brainstorming (creativity). 
Use of a risk breakdown structure which organizes the categories of potential risks on the project, a prompt 
list, or a set of generic list categories may assist in ensuring that as many sources of risk as practicable have 
been addressed, while recognizing that no such tools are complete nor can they replace original thinking. 
--- Page 41 --- 
CHAPTER 5 − IDENTIFY RISKS 
Whichever risk identifi cation techniques are used, it is important that identifi ed risks are unambiguously 
described in order to ensure that the project risk process is focused on the actual risks and not distracted or 
diluted by non-risks. Use of structured risk descriptions can ensure clarity. Risk meta-language offers a useful 
way of distinguishing a risk from its cause(s) and effect(s), describing each risk using three-part statements in 
the form: “As a result of cause, risk may occur, which would lead to effect.” The relationship between cause, 
risk, and effect is shown in Figure 5-2. 
Figure 5-2. Cause, Risk, and Effect 
5.4 Documenting the Results of the Identify Risks Process 
The results from the Identify Risks process should be recorded in order to capture all relevant information 
currently available for each identifi ed risk. The main output from the Identify Risks process is the risk register. 
This includes a properly structured risk description and the nominated risk owner for each risk, and may also 
include information on the causes and effects of the risk, trigger conditions, and preliminary responses. 
--- Page 43 --- 
CHAPTER 6 
PERFORM QUALITATIVE RISK ANALYSIS 
6.1 Purpose and Objectives of the Perform Qualitative Risk 
Analysis Process 
The Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process assesses and evaluates characteristics of individually 
identifi ed project risks and prioritizes risks based on agreed-upon characteristics. 
Assessing individual risks using qualitative risk analysis evaluates the probability that each risk will occur 
and the effect of each individual risk on the project objectives. As such it does not directly address the overall 
risk to project objectives that results from the combined effect of all risks and their potential interactions with 
each other. This can however be achieved through use of quantitative risk analysis techniques (see Chapter 7). 
One step in the analysis is to categorize risks according to their sources or causes. If several risks arise 
from a common source, sometimes called a root cause, risk responses may be more effective when they focus 
on addressing this root cause. 
Identifying common effects from groups of risks allows identifi cation of the areas of greatest risk exposure 
(e.g. to the project completion date, the budget, or a particular deliverable’s scope), facilitating risk response 
focus in these areas. 
The methods of qualitative risk analysis are applied to the list of risks created or updated by the Identify 
Risks process to provide project management with the characteristics of the risks that have the most infl uence 
(positive or negative) on achieving the project’s objectives. Risks that are assessed as high priority to either 
threaten or to enhance the achievement of project objectives will be an important focus in the Plan Risk 
Responses process. They may be further analyzed, such as in the analysis of the overall project risk that is 
discussed in Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process. 
6.2 Critical Success Factors for the Perform Qualitative Risk 
Analysis Process 
Several factors that lead to successful qualitative risk analysis are described in Sections 6.2.1 through 
6.2.4, and summarized in Figure 6-1. Agreement of the project stakeholders is a fundamental criterion and 
a common theme. The agreed-upon approach is the foundation of process credibility. Then, agreed-upon 
defi nitions enable high-quality information to be collected. Finally, with these conditions in place, the process 
can be executed reliably, which contributes to the credibility of its outputs. 
--- Page 44 --- 
CHAPTER 6 − PERFORM QUALITATIVE RISK ANALYSIS 
Figure 6 -1. Building Risk Analysis Credibility 
6.2.1 Use Agreed-Upon Approach 
The process is based on an agreed-upon approach to this assessment that is applied across all of the 
identifi ed risks in any project. By the nature of project risk, all risks may be assessed according to probability 
of occurrence and impact on individual objectives should the risk occur. Other factors may be considered in 
determining the importance of a risk as follows: 
• Urgency (proximity). Risks requiring near term responses may be considered more urgent to 
address. Indicators of urgency can include the lead time necessary to execute a risk response and the 
clarity of symptoms and warning signs (also known as detectability) that may trigger the response. 
Manageability. 
• 
Some risks are not manageable and it would be a waste of resources to attempt to 
address them. The project team may examine these and decide to: 
Go forward, perhaps establishing a contingency reserve. 
○ 
Stop or re-scope the project because these risks pose an unmanageable threat or an 
○ 
opportunity that should not be missed with high probability and consequences. 
Inform the customer of the risks and ask for a decision from their point of view. 
○ 
Impact external to the project. 
• 
A risk may increase in importance if it affects the enterprise beyond 
the project. 
6.2.2 Use Agreed-Upon Defi nitions of Risk Terms 
The risk assessment should be based on agreed-upon defi nitions of important terms, and those defi nitions 
should be used consistently when assessing each risk. The use of defi nitions, for example, of levels of probability 
and of impact on objectives, assists the providers of the information in giving realistic assessments for each 
risk, and facilitates the communication of the results to management and other stakeholders. 
--- Page 45 --- 
CHAPTER 6 − PERFORM QUALITATIVE RISK ANALYSIS 
6.2.3 Collect High-Quality Information about Risks 
Collection of high-quality information about risks is required. Often this information is not available in any 
historic database and should be gathered by interviews, workshops, and other means using expert judgment. Data 
gathered from individuals may be subject to reporting or intentional bias. When this occurs, the bias should be 
identifi ed and remedied where possible, or a different, unbiased source of information should be found and used. 
6.2.4 Perform Iterative Qualitative Risk Analysis 
The success of qualitative risk analysis is enhanced if the process is used periodically throughout the project. It 
is impossible to know in advance all the risks that may occur in a project, therefore the Identify Risks and Perform 
Qualitative Analysis processes should be repeated periodically for individual risks. The frequency of this effort will 
be planned in the Plan Risk Management process, but may also depend on events within the project itself. 
6.3 Tools and Techniques for the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis Process 
The tools and techniques used for assessing individual risks will identify the risks that are important to the 
project’s success. This process is illustrated in Figure 6-2. 
Figure 6-2. The Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis Process 
--- Page 46 --- 
CHAPTER 6 − PERFORM QUALITATIVE RISK ANALYSIS 
6.3.1 Select Risk Characteristics that Defi ne Risks’ Importance 
Qualitative risk analysis tools provide ways to distinguish those risks that are important for response or 
further analysis from those that are less important. The criteria that make a risk of interest to management are 
agreed upon in advance and implemented in the tools used. Output from qualitative risk analysis tools includes 
a listing of risks in priority order or in priority groups (e.g., high, moderate, and low). 
The tools for qualitative risk analysis allow the organization or project stakeholders to specify those levels 
or combinations of risk characteristics that make a particular risk of interest to management. Most tools assess 
a risk’s importance from a combination of probability of occurrence and degree of impact on objectives. 
6.3.2 Collect and Analyze Data 
Assessment of individual risks is based on information collected about them. Therefore, data collection 
and evaluation tools, including interviews, workshops, and references to databases of prior projects, require 
management support and attention. It is important to protect against bias in data gathering, which is important 
when relying on expert judgment for the information. 
6.3.3 Prioritize Risks by Probability and Impact on Specifi c Objectives 
Some tools permit distinguishing a risk’s priority in terms of the affected objective. This capability provides 
a list of risks that are important for any specifi c objective of interest to management. This is useful since it is 
common for risks to have uneven impacts on various project objectives. 
6.3.4 Prioritize Risks by Probability and Impact on Overall Project 
There are reasons for constructing a measure of a specifi c risk’s importance to the entire project as 
contrasted with its importance to specifi c objectives. A common reason is for ease of communication with 
management and other stakeholders. When a single risk prioritization index is needed, the organization should 
be explicit about how that index is created. Usually the index refl ects the organization’s preference among 
objectives. The technique for creating the overall risk priority measure should be documented in the Plan Risk 
Management process. 
--- Page 47 --- 
CHAPTER 6 − PERFORM QUALITATIVE RISK ANALYSIS 
6.3.5 Categorize Risk Causes 
Categorizing risks appropriately may lead to improved analysis of the probability and magnitude of 
project risk and to effective responses. Understanding the relationships between risks may provide a better 
understanding of the possibility and magnitude of project risk than if risks are only considered as separate 
and independent events. Identifying common root causes of a group of risks, for instance, may reveal both the 
magnitude of the risk event for the group as a whole along with effective strategies that might address several 
risks simultaneously. Alternatively, some risks may be linked with others in a causal chain, and understanding 
the chain of risks may lead to a better understanding of the implication of risk for the project. Identifying risks 
that can occur at the same time or using the same resources for recovery might provide a realistic picture of 
problems of risk mitigation using scarce resources. 
Combining the results of the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process with the risk breakdown structure 
(see Identify Risks, Chapter 5) can show clusters of priority risks arising from specifi c sources. A combination 
of the risk analysis information with the work breakdown structure (WBS) can show which areas of the project 
exhibit the most risk. Assessing the high-priority risks’ impact on one objective, such as the schedule, may 
indicate which activities to address to reduce that objective’s uncertainty. All of these approaches can contribute 
to the realism and usefulness of the qualitative risk analysis. 
6.3.6 Document the Results of the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis Process 
The Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process adds structure to the list of undifferentiated risks (see Identify 
Risks, Chapter 5) into categories of priority. Priorities are usually based on the risk’s probability of occurring 
and its potential impact on specifi c project objectives or on the whole project. Each identifi ed risk is assigned 
a priority, perhaps by objective or for the entire project. This information is usually stored in the risk register 
which is easy to use and update with new information. The risk register list of prioritized risks is posted to the 
project participants who are responsible for further analysis or action to improve the project plan. Risks that 
are judged to have high priority are segregated for further analysis and response planning and are generally 
monitored frequently. Risks of low priority to the project may be placed on a watch list and are reviewed less 
often for changes in their status. 
--- Page 49 --- 
CHAPTER 7 
PERFORM QUANTITATIVE RISK ANALYSIS 
7.1 Purpose and Objectives of the Perform Quantitative Risk 
Analysis Process 
The Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process provides a numerical estimate of the overall effect of risk on 
the objectives of the project, based on current plans and information, when considering risks simultaneously. 
Results from this type of analysis can be used to evaluate the likelihood of success in achieving project 
objectives and to estimate contingency reserves, usually for time and cost that are appropriate to both the risks 
and the risk tolerance of project stakeholders. 
It is generally accepted that analyzing uncertainty in the project using quantitative techniques such as 
Monte Carlo simulation may provide more realism in the estimate of the overall project cost or schedule 
than a non-probabilistic approach which assumes that the activity durations or line-item cost estimates are 
deterministic. However it should be recognized that quantitative risk analysis is not always required or appropriate 
for all projects. For example, qualitative risk analysis may provide enough information for development of 
effective risk responses, especially for smaller projects. Therefore, during the Plan Risk Management process, 
the benefi ts of quantitative risk analysis should be weighed against the effort required to ensure that the 
additional insights and value justify the additional effort. 
Partial risk analyses, such as qualitative risk analysis, aim at prioritizing individual risks viewed one at a time 
and therefore cannot produce measures of overall project risk when all risks are considered simultaneously. 
Calculating estimates of overall project risk is the focus of the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process. 
Specifi c project risks are usually best understood and quantifi ed at a detailed level such as the line-item 
cost or schedule activity level. By contrast, project objectives such as achievement of the project’s budget or 
the schedule are specifi ed at a higher level, often at the level of the total project. An overall risk analysis, such 
as one that uses quantitative techniques, estimates the implication of all quantifi ed risks on project objectives. 
The implementation of overall risk analysis using quantitative methods requires: 
Complete and accurate representation of the project objectives built up from individual project 
• 
elements. Examples of these representations include the project schedule or cost estimate. 
Identifying risks on individual project elements such as schedule activities or line-item costs at a 
• 
level of detail that lends itself to specifi c assessment of individual risks. 
Including generic risks that have a broader effect than individual project elements. 
• 
Applying a quantitative method (such as Monte Carlo simulation or decision tree analysis) that incorporates 
• 
multiple risks simultaneously in determining overall impact on the overall project objective. 
--- Page 50 --- 
CHAPTER 7 − PERFORM QUANTITATIVE RISK ANALYSIS 
Results of the quantitative analysis will be compared to the project plan (baseline or current) to give 
management an estimate of the overall project risk and will answer important questions such as: 
What is the probability of meeting the project’s objectives? 
• 
How much contingency reserve (e.g., reserves or buffers of time, resources, and cost) is needed to 
• 
provide the organization with the level of certainty it requires based upon its risk tolerance? 
What are those parts of the project, such as line-item costs or schedule activities, which contribute 
• 
the most risk when all risks are considered simultaneously? 
Which individual risks contribute the most to overall project risk? 
• 
Estimating overall project risk using quantitative methods helps distinguish those projects where quantifi ed 
risks threaten objectives beyond the tolerance of the stakeholders, from those for which the objectives are 
within acceptable tolerances even when risk is considered. The former may be targeted for vigorous risk 
responses aimed at protecting those objectives most important to the stakeholders. 
A high-level comparison of quantitative and qualitative risk analysis processes is presented in Figure 7-1. 
Figure 7-1. Comparison of Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches 
7.2 Critical Success Factors for the Perform Quantitative Risk 
Analysis Process 
Success in achieving the objectives of quantitative risk analysis depends explicitly on at least the factors 
described in Sections 7.2.1 through 7.2.6. 
--- Page 51 --- 
CHAPTER 7 − PERFORM QUANTITATIVE RISK ANALYSIS 
7.2.1 Prior Risk Identifi cation and Qualitative Risk Analysis 
The Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process occurs after the Identify Risks and Perform Qualitative 
Risk Analysis processes have been completed. Reference to a prioritized list of identified risks ensures 
that the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process will consider all significant risks when analyzing their 
effects quantitatively. 
7.2.2 Appropriate Project Model 
An appropriate model of the project should be used as the basis for quantitative risk analysis. Project 
models most frequently used in quantitative risk analysis include the project schedule (for time), line-item 
cost estimates (for cost), decision tree (for decisions in the face of uncertainty) and other total-project models. 
Quantitative risk analysis is especially sensitive to the completeness and correctness of the model of the 
project that is used. 
7.2.3 Commitment to Collecting High-Quality Risk Data 
Often high-quality data about risks are not available in any historic database and should be gathered 
by interviews, workshops, and other means using expert judgment of those present. Collection of risk data 
requires resources and time as well as management support. 
7.2.4 Unbiased Data 
Success in gathering risk analysis data requires the ability to recognize when biases occur and combating 
that bias or developing other unbiased sources of the data. Bias in risk data can occur for many reasons, but 
two common sources of bias are cognitive bias and motivational bias. 
7.2.5 Overall Project Risk Derived from Individual Risks 
The Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process is based upon a methodology that correctly derives the 
overall project risk from the individual risks. In risk analysis of cost and schedule, for example, an appropriate 
method is Monte Carlo simulation. A decision tree is an appropriate method for making decisions when future 
events are not certain, using the probability and impact of all risks, and combining their effect to derive an 
overall project measure such as value or cost. In each of these methods, the risks are specifi ed at the level 
of the detailed tasks or line-item costs and incorporated into the model of the project to calculate effects on 
objectives such as schedule or cost for the entire project, by combining those risks. 
--- Page 52 --- 
CHAPTER 7 − PERFORM QUANTITATIVE RISK ANALYSIS 
7.2.6 Interrelationships Between Risks in Quantitative Risk Analysis 
Attention should be given to the possibility that the individual risks in the project model are related to 
each other. For example, several risks may have a common root cause and therefore are likely to occur 
together. This possibility is sometimes addressed by correlating the risks that are related, ensuring that 
they generally occur together during the analysis. Another common way to represent the risks which occur 
together is by using the risk register listing of the risk or root cause and attaching it to several project 
elements such as schedule activities or cost elements. When a particular risk occurs, the affected elements 
will all experience the effect of that risk together. 
7.3 Tools and Techniques for the Perform Quantitative Risk 
Analysis Process 
Tools and techniques used appropriately for quantitative risk analysis have several characteristics, as 
follows: 
7.3.1 Comprehensive Risk Representation 
Risk models permit representation of many, if not all, of the risks that have impact on an objective 
simultaneously. They also permit the representation of both opportunities and threats to the project’s 
objectives. 
7.3.2 Risk Impact Calculation 
Quantitative models facilitate the correct calculation of the effect of many risks, which are typically identifi ed 
and quantifi ed at a level of detail below the total project, on the project objectives, which are typically described 
at the level of the total project. 
7.3.3 Quantitative Method Appropriate to Analyzing Uncertainty 
Probability models use a quantitative method that addresses uncertainty. Specifi cally, the methods should 
be able to handle the way uncertainty is represented, predominantly as probability of an event’s occurring or as 
probability distributions for a range of outcomes. A good example of this is the use of Monte Carlo simulation 
tools that permit the combination of probability distributions of line-item costs or schedule activity durations, 
many of which are uncertain. 
7.3.4 Data Gathering Tools 
Data gathering tools used in this process include assessment of historical data and workshops, interviews, or 
questionnaires to gather quantifi ed information—for example, on the probability of a risk occurring, a probability 
distribution of its potential impacts on cost or time, or relationships such as correlation between risks. 
--- Page 53 --- 
CHAPTER 7 − PERFORM QUANTITATIVE RISK ANALYSIS 
7.3.5 Effective Presentation of Quantitative Analysis Results 
Results from the quantitative tools are generally not available in standard deterministic project management 
methods such as project scheduling or cost estimating. Examples of these are the probability distribution of 
project completion dates or total costs and the expected value of a project decision. These results, when all 
risks are considered simultaneously, include the following: 
Probability of achieving a project objective such as fi nishing on time or within budget. 
• 
Amount of contingency reserve in cost, time, or resources needed to provide a required level of 
• 
confi dence. 
Identity or location within the project model of the most important risks. An example of this is a 
• 
sensitivity analysis in a cost risk analysis or a criticality analysis in a schedule risk analysis. 
The elements of a quantitative risk analysis are illustrated in Figure 7-2. 
Figure 7-2. Structure of a Quantitative Risk Analysis 
--- Page 54 --- 
CHAPTER 7 − PERFORM QUANTITATIVE RISK ANALYSIS 
7.3.6 Iterative Quantitative Risk Analysis 
The success of the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process is enhanced if the process is used periodically 
throughout the project. It is impossible to know in advance all of the risks that may occur in a project. Often 
quantitative risk analysis should be repeated as the project proceeds. The frequency of this effort will be 
determined during the Plan Risk Management process but will also depend on events within the project itself 
(see Monitor and Control Risks, Chapter 9). 
7.3.7 Information for Response Planning 
Overall project contingency reserve in time and cost should be refl ected in the project’s schedule and 
budget. Quantitative risk analysis provides information that may be used to modify the project plan. If 
the overall risk to time and cost indicates that an adjustment in scope is needed, the scope changes are 
agreed upon and documented and a new quantitative risk analysis is carried out to refl ect the new aspects 
of the project. 
7.4 Documenting the Results of the Perform Quantitative Risk 
Analysis Process 
The contingency reserves calculated in quantitative project cost and schedule risk analysis are incorporated, 
respectively, into the cost estimate and the schedule to establish a prudent target and a realistic expectation 
for the project. Contingency reserves may also be established to provide for the capture of opportunities that 
are judged to be priorities for the project. If the contingency reserve required exceeds the time or resources 
available, changes in the project scope and plan may result. 
Also, the results of the analysis may provide more or less urgency to risk response (see Plan Risk Responses, 
Chapter 8) depending on the probability of achieving the plan’s objectives or the amount of contingency reserve 
required to provide the necessary level of confi dence. The results of a quantitative risk analysis are recorded 
and passed on to the person and/or group responsible for project management within the organization for any 
further actions required to make full use of these results. 
--- Page 55 --- 
CHAPTER 8 
PLAN RISK RESPONSES 
The Plan Risk Responses process determines effective response actions that are appropriate to the priority 
of the individual risks and to the overall project risk. It takes into account the stakeholders’ risk attitudes and 
the conventions specifi ed in the Risk Management Plan, in addition to any constraints and assumptions that 
were determined when the risks were identifi ed and analyzed. 
8.1 Purpose and Objectives of the Plan Risk Responses Process 
The objective of the Plan Risk Responses process is to determine the set of actions which most enhance the 
chances of project success while complying with applicable organizational and project constraints. 
Once risks have been identifi ed, analyzed, and prioritized, plans should be developed for addressing every 
risk the project team considers to be suffi ciently important, either because of the threat it poses to the project 
objectives or the opportunity it offers. The planning entails agreeing upon the actions to be taken and the 
potential changes to budget, schedule, resources, and scope which these actions might cause. 
Contingent risk response actions need to be executed at the optimum time. For this reason, the response 
specifi cation for each such risk should include a description of any corresponding trigger conditions. 
The responsibility for monitoring the project conditions and implementing the corresponding actions should 
be clearly assigned. Every risk should have been allocated to a risk owner as part of the Identify Risks process, 
and each of the corresponding risk responses should now be assigned to a specifi c risk action owner. The risk 
owner is responsible for ensuring that the risk response is effective and for planning additional risk responses 
if required, whereas the risk action owner is responsible for ensuring that the agreed-upon risk responses are 
carried out as planned, in a timely manner. The role of the risk owner and that of the risk action owner may be 
assigned to a single person. 
Responses, when implemented, can have potential effects on the project objectives and, as such, can 
generate additional risks. These are known as secondary risks and have to be analyzed and planned for in the 
same way as those risks which were initially identifi ed. 
It is never feasible or even desirable to eliminate all threats from a project. Similarly, there is also a limit 
to the extent to which opportunities can be proactively managed. There may be residual risks that will remain 
after the responses have been implemented. These residual risks should be clearly identifi ed, analyzed, 
documented, and communicated to all relevant stakeholders. 
--- Page 56 --- 
CHAPTER 8 − PLAN RISK RESPONSES 
All the approved, unconditional actions arising from risk response planning should be integrated into the 
project management plan in order to ensure that they are carried out as part of normal project implementation. The 
corresponding organizational and project management rules should also be invoked, including the following: 
Project change management and confi guration control; 
• 
Project planning, budgeting, and scheduling; 
• 
Resource management; and 
• 
Project communication planning. 
• 
8.2 Critical Success Factors for the Plan Risk Responses Process 
A range of factors are important for the success of the Plan Risk Responses process. These are described 
in Sections 8.2.1 through 8.2.8 and shown in Figure 8-1. 
Figure 8-1. Critical Success Factors for Risk Response Planning 
8.2.1 Communicate 
Communication with the various stakeholders should be maintained in an open and appropriate manner. The 
resulting plans are disseminated and approval obtained in order to ensure full acceptance by all stakeholders. 
In addition, if organizational causes of risks, such as culture, attitudes, or disagreements concerning 
objectives are present, they should be addressed openly. This may require involving high levels of the 
organization’s management and other stakeholders. 
--- Page 57 --- 
CHAPTER 8 − PLAN RISK RESPONSES 
8.2.2 Clearly Defi ne Risk-Related Roles and Responsibilities 
The risk response success will be dependent upon the full support and involvement of the project team and 
other stakeholders. The key roles for Project Risk Management are those of risk owner and risk action owner. 
A single risk owner should be assigned to every identifi ed risk, and each agreed-upon risk response should 
have a single risk action owner. The people with the corresponding responsibilities should be aware of what is 
expected of them, and the other project stakeholders should understand and accept the needs and authority 
of these roles. 
Management may take ownership of risks with political, organizational causes. In addition, senior 
management should approve and track associated risk-related contingency reserves. 
8.2.3 Specify Timing of Risk Responses 
Agreed-upon responses should be integrated into the project management plan and will therefore be 
scheduled and assigned for execution. The responses that depend on uncertain conditions should also be 
monitored so as to be performed if the conditions warrant them. 
8.2.4 Provide Resources, Budget, and Schedule for Responses 
Each response should be planned in detail in accordance with the methodology of the project and integrated 
into the project management plan. This entails estimating the resources, costs, and duration; updating the 
budget and schedule; obtaining approval from management; and obtaining commitment from the risk owners 
and risk action owners. Management’s role at this stage is vital for supporting the project manager in developing 
risk responses and authorizing the corresponding resources. 
8.2.5 Address the Interaction of Risks and Responses 
Responses may be developed to address risks related either by cause and effect or by common root cause. 
Categorization of risks, for example by using tools such as the risk breakdown structure, affi nity diagram, or 
other categorizing tools, may help identify and address this situation. There is also a need during the Plan Risk 
Responses process to consider the risks aggregated during the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process 
(e.g., ten small, related risks combined may pose a big risk to the project), and then to develop generic 
responses where possible. Another interaction effect that may occur is when one risk, if it occurs, may affect 
the probability or impact of other risks. 
Deciding on the response strategy may require a compromise, since some proposed responses may be 
mutually exclusive or counterproductive. For example mitigating a threat to time could cost money, thereby 
increasing pressure on the budget. Risk response planning also needs to take a holistic view of all proposed 
responses and make sure they are coherent. 
--- Page 58 --- 
CHAPTER 8 − PLAN RISK RESPONSES 
The challenge therefore in planning responses to risks is the need to control the potential effects of the 
strategy developed for treating the original risk. If this is overlooked, the total level of threat in a project can 
actually increase, or the potential for opportunities can be compromised. 
8.2.6 Ensure Appropriate, Timely, Effective, and Agreed-Upon Responses 
In general, responses should be appropriate, timely, cost-effective, feasible, achievable, agreed-upon, 
assigned, and accepted. Any proposed risk response plan needs to be assessed against the following criteria: 
Consistency with organizational values, project objectives, and stakeholder expectations; 
• 
Technical feasibility; 
• 
Ability of the project team or risk action owners outside the project to carry out the corresponding 
• 
actions; and 
Balance between overall impact of the response on the project objectives and the improvement in 
• 
the risk profi le of the project. 
8.2.7 Address Both Threats and Opportunities 
Risk response planning should combine responses that address the threats as well as those that provide 
for opportunities into a single, integrated plan. If either threats or opportunities are not fully addressed, the 
combined set of response strategies will be incomplete and may even be invalid. 
8.2.8 Develop Strategies before Tactical Responses 
Risk response planning should be carried out in an open-minded manner rather than adopting the fi rst 
response that seems to be feasible. The responses should be planned at a general, strategic level and the 
strategy validated and agreed upon, prior to developing the detailed tactical approach. 
Once the responses have been planned at a strategic level, they should be expanded into actions at the tactical 
level and integrated into the project management plan (e.g., schedule, budget, and resource assignments). This 
activity may generate additional secondary risks, which will need to be addressed at this time. 
8.3 Risk Response Strategies 
The project manager should develop risk response strategies for individual risks, sets of risks, and project- 
level risks. An overview of the steps in arriving at a complete set of responses is given in Figure 8-2. 
The affected stakeholders should be involved in determining the strategies. Once the strategies have been 
selected, they need to be agreed upon by the entity that approves those strategies. There are four strategies 
which address individual risks for threats and opportunities as described in Sections 8.3.1 through 8.3.4 (see 
also Fig. 8-2). 
--- Page 59 --- 
CHAPTER 8 − PLAN RISK RESPONSES 
8.3.1 Avoid a Threat or Exploit an Opportunity 
This strategy involves taking the actions required to address a threat or an opportunity in order to ensure 
either that the threat cannot occur or can have no effect on the project, or that the opportunity will occur and 
the project will be able to take advantage of it. 
8.3.2 Transfer a Threat or Share an Opportunity 
This strategy entails transference to a third party that is better positioned to address a particular threat or 
opportunity. 
8.3.3 Mitigate a Threat or Enhance an Opportunity 
Mitigation and enhancement are the most widely applicable and widely used response strategies. Here, the 
approach is to identify actions that will decrease the probability and/or the impact of a threat, and increase the 
probability and/or the impact of an opportunity. 
8.3.4 Accept a Threat or an Opportunity 
This strategy applies when the other strategies are not considered applicable or feasible. Acceptance entails 
taking no action unless the risk actually occurs, in which case contingency or fallback plans may be developed 
ahead of time, to be implemented if the risk presents itself. 
8.3.5 Applying Risk Response Strategies to Overall Project Risk 
In addition to responding to individual risks, the four risk response strategies can be applied to address 
overall project risk as follows: 
Cancel the project, as a last resort, if the overall level of risk remains unacceptable. 
• 
Set up a business structure in which the customer and the supplier share the risk. 
• 
Re-plan the project or change the scope and boundaries of the project, for example, by modifying the 
• 
project priority, resource allocations, delivery calendar, etc. 
Pursue the project despite a risk exposure that exceeds the desired level. 
• 
8.4 Tools and Techniques for the Plan Risk Responses Process 
There are four categories of tools and techniques, as follows: 
Creativity tools to identify potential responses, 
• 
Decision-support tools for determining the optimal potential response. 
• 
Strategy implementation techniques designed to turn a strategy into action, and 
• 
Tools to transfer control to the Monitor and Control Risks process. 
• 
--- Page 60 --- 
CHAPTER 8 − PLAN RISK RESPONSES 
These categories of tools can be used respectively to identify potential responses, select the most 
appropriate response, translate strategy into planning, and assign the corresponding actions. The steps 
involved in planning risk responses are shown in Figure 8.2. 
8.4.1 Response Identifi cation 
Risk response planning builds on the available information about the potential risks and aims to determine 
the optimal set of responses. For this reason, it should involve subject matter experts and employ creativity 
techniques in order to explore all of the options. Project planning and execution techniques are then required 
to evaluate the potential effects of the various options on the project’s objectives. 
8.4.2 Response Selection 
Once the set of potential responses for the risks being addressed is established, decision-support techniques 
may need to be applied to select the best possible subset from these responses. The selection process should 
take into account the cost of the responses, the impact on the project objectives, uncertainty of outcomes and 
the possible secondary and residual risks. The Identify Risks, Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis, and Plan Risk 
Responses processes may then need to be applied to the resultant project management plan and the residual 
and secondary risks that it would entail. This iterative approach continues until all of the individual risks are 
deemed acceptable and the overall risk is within a predefi ned threshold. 
8.4.3 Action Planning 
Project planning tools are used to turn the chosen strategies into concrete actions and to integrate these into 
existing plans. The corresponding actions may be unconditional (i.e., integrated into the project management 
plan) or contingent on a trigger condition and predefi ned as a contingency response strategy. 
8.4.4 Ownership and Responsibility Assignment 
The project manager needs to use resource assignment processes to ensure the availability of an owner for 
each risk and for each response action, so that each associated risk is managed and each corresponding risk 
response is carried out in a timely and effective manner. 
To enable risk monitoring to identify the imminence or actual occurrence of the corresponding event, every 
contingency response strategy should include a set of trigger conditions. The responsibility for monitoring 
these conditions should be clearly assigned in the Plan Risk Responses process and managed in the Monitor 
and Control Risks process. 
--- Page 61 --- 
CHAPTER 8 − PLAN RISK RESPONSES 
The strategic defi nition of risk responses should include measurable criteria for success of the response. 
Risk action owners should monitor their assigned risks, take agreed-upon actions as required, and provide 
the risk owners with relevant information on status or changes to the risk characteristics. Risk owners should 
assess the effectiveness of any actions, decide whether additional actions are required, and keep the project 
manager informed of the situation. 
Figure 8-2. The Steps Involved in Planning Risk Responses 
--- Page 62 --- 
CHAPTER 8 − PLAN RISK RESPONSES 
8.5 Documenting the Results of the Plan Risk Responses Process 
Risk response planning is based on the information placed in the risk register during execution of the 
Identify Risks and Perform Analysis processes. The corresponding risk response information is often referred 
to as the risk response plan, although it may in fact be an integral part of the risk register. 
8.5.1 Add Risk Responses to the Risk Register 
The response-related information for each risk is recorded in the risk register and updated regularly. Any 
interested stakeholder should be able to rapidly access all the information required to verify their responsibilities 
and manage the risk in accordance with the risk response plan. The set of residual risks and their priorities 
are clearly identifi ed and recorded. 
8.5.2 Add Corresponding Risk Responses to the Project Management Plan 
While developing the detailed set of risk responses, the project-related implications are evaluated for 
inclusion in a modifi ed project management plan. These include costs, resource assignments, scheduling 
details, and changes to project documentation. Until these changes are formally approved along with the 
additional risks that they may carry, risk response planning cannot be considered complete. 
8.5.3 Review and Document Predicted Exposure 
Once the risk responses have been defi ned and integrated into the project management plan, the individual 
and overall residual risks related to this plan are evaluated in order to determine whether additional response 
planning is required, as shown in Figure 8-2. This evaluation should provide an estimate of both the expected 
post-response situation and the potential improvement of the risk exposure assuming that the proposed 
responses are effective. The evaluation should be documented. 
--- Page 63 --- 
CHAPTER 9 
MONITOR AND CONTROL RISKS 
The effectiveness of Project Risk Management depends upon the way the approved plans are carried out. 
These plans should be executed correctly, reviewed, and updated regularly. If this is carried out correctly, the 
invested effort will be rewarded and future projects will benefi t from this project’s experience. 
9.1 Purpose and Objectives of the Monitor and Control Risks Process 
The primary objectives of risk monitoring and controlling are to track identifi ed risks, monitor residual risks, 
identify new risks, ensure that risk response plans are executed at the appropriate time, and evaluate their 
effectiveness throughout the project life cycle. 
In addition to tracking and managing the risk response actions, the effectiveness of all of the Project 
Risk Management processes should be reviewed to provide improvements to the management of the current 
project as well as future ones. 
For each risk or set of risks for which a contingent response has been defi ned, the corresponding set of 
trigger conditions should have been specifi ed. It is the responsibility of the action owner to ensure that these 
conditions are effectively monitored and that the corresponding actions are carried out as defi ned, in a timely 
manner. 
Once the Plan Risk Responses process is complete, all of the approved unconditional response actions 
should have been included and defi ned in the current project management plan. The fi rst action of risk 
monitoring and controlling is to check whether this is the case and take any appropriate action if necessary, 
such as invoking the change management process with respect to any missing actions. This will then ensure 
that the agreed-upon actions are carried out within the normal project execution framework. 
The risk owners and risk action owners need to be briefed on any changes that may affect their 
responsibilities. Effective communication needs to be maintained between them and the project manager so 
that the designated stakeholders accept accountability for controlling the potential outcomes of specifi c risks, 
apply their best efforts to track the associated trigger conditions and carry out the agreed-upon responses in 
a timely manner. 
In addition to the response actions and trigger conditions, a mechanism for measuring the effectiveness 
of the response is provided by the Plan Risk Responses process. The risk action owner should keep the risk 
owner aware of the status of the response actions so that the risk owner can decide when the risk has been 
effectively dealt with, or whether additional actions need to be planned and implemented. 
--- Page 64 --- 
CHAPTER 9 − MONITOR AND CONTROL RISKS 
As the project progresses, additional information becomes available and the project environment may 
change as some risks occur, whether foreseen or unforeseen, and others become or cease to be relevant. 
The planning should therefore be kept current and the project manager should ensure that periodic risk 
reassessment, including risk identifi cation, analysis, and response planning, is repeated at reasonable intervals, 
or in response to project events—without generating excessive administrative overhead. Typical reasons for 
risk reassessment are: 
Occurrence of a major or unexpected risk, 
• 
Need to analyze a complex change request, 
• 
Phase end review, 
• 
Project re-planning or major plan elaboration, and 
• 
Periodic review to ensure that the information remains current. 
• 
In the event of major organizational changes, risk management planning may need to be revisited prior to 
reassessing the risks. 
In addition to the regular status reviews, periodic audits should be performed to determine strengths and 
weaknesses in handling risks within the project. This should entail identifying any barriers to effectiveness or 
keys to success in risk management, recognition of which could lead to improvements in risk management of 
the current or future projects. 
At the end of the project, an integrated analysis of the risk management process should be carried out 
with a focus on long-term process improvements. This analysis consolidates the fi ndings of the periodic 
audits to identify lessons that would be applicable in general to a large proportion of the organization’s 
projects in the future, such as appropriate levels of resources, adequate time for the analysis, use of tools, 
level of detail, etc. 
At project closure, the project manager should ensure that a description has been given of the closure of 
every risk in the risk register, for example: (a) did not occur; (b) occurred and contingency plan invoked; or (c) 
occurred and impact to the project scope (i.e., time, cost, and quality). 
The output of the audit of the risk management process should be consolidated with specifi c information 
with respect to the project’s experience of risks, and any generally applicable guidelines for the organization 
should be highlighted and potential actions proposed for applying them. This can lead to an update to the 
corresponding organizational process assets. 
An overview of the steps involved in the Monitor and Control Risks process is given in Figure 9-1. 
--- Page 65 --- 
CHAPTER 9 − MONITOR AND CONTROL RISKS 
Figure 9-1. Schematic Representation of the Monitor and Control Risks Process 
9.2 Critical Success Factors for the Monitor and Control Risks Process 
Critical success factors relate to maintaining risk awareness throughout the project and include the 
characteristics and capabilities detailed in Sections 9.2.1 through 9.2.3. 
9.2.1 Integrate Risk Monitoring and Control with Project Monitoring and Control 
From the start, the project management plan should include the actions required to monitor and control 
project risk. This should be set up early in the project planning cycle, and then adjusted in view of the risk 
response planning decisions adding, for example, the actions associated with monitoring specifi c conditions 
or metrics. Once risk response planning has been carried out, the project schedule should include all of the 
agreed-upon, response-related actions so that they can be carried out as a normal part of project execution 
and tracked accordingly. 
--- Page 66 --- 
CHAPTER 9 − MONITOR AND CONTROL RISKS 
9.2.2 Continuously Monitor Risk Trigger Conditions 
Risk response planning will have defi ned a set of actions to be carried out as part of the project schedule 
as well as actions whose execution is dependent on a predefi ned trigger condition. Checking for specifi cally 
defi ned risks that may trigger conditional responses is the responsibility of the risk action owner, in close 
collaboration with the risk owner under the overall authority of the project manager. 
9.2.3 Maintain Risk Awareness 
Risk management reports should be a regular item on every status meeting agenda to ensure that all team 
members remain aware of the importance of risk management and to ensure that it is fully integrated into all 
of the project management decisions. 
The project’s senior-level sponsor should require regular reports on the risks and the planned responses 
to ensure that stakeholders are aware of the importance of keeping a focus on risk. Sponsor feedback also 
motivates the project team by demonstrating senior-level interest in Project Risk Management. 
Stakeholders’ perception of the effectiveness of risk management is conditioned in part by the way in 
which risks are handled as they occur, and by the number or characteristics of such events. It is therefore 
crucial, whenever a risk occurs, that information about the event, as well as the progress and effectiveness of 
the responses, be communicated at regular intervals and in an honest manner adapted to the needs of each 
stakeholder. This should be supported by a well-executed communications plan. 
9.3 Tools and Techniques for the Monitor and Control Risks Process 
In addition to standard project management monitoring and control capabilities, risk monitoring and 
controlling requires a focus on the tools which will support its key success factors for tracking overall risk as 
well as individual risks. 
9.3.1 Managing Contingency Reserves 
Reserves may have been allocated separately to cover time-related and cost-related risks. Techniques 
are required that allow the project manager to assess at any point in the project whether these provide the 
required level of confi dence in the success of the project. 
Tools for managing time buffers should be closely integrated into the project’s scheduling techniques, 
whereas those for managing cost should be compatible with the fi nancial practices. Tools are required to 
identify trends and forecast future outcomes to determine whether the reserves will remain suffi cient. Tools 
are also required for tracking progress and spending in a consolidated manner. 
--- Page 67 --- 
CHAPTER 9 − MONITOR AND CONTROL RISKS 
9.3.2 Tracking Trigger Conditions 
Trigger conditions and the corresponding metrics are defi ned during the Plan Risk Responses process. 
Tools are required to evaluate and track these conditions against the project baseline or specifi ed thresholds, 
based on actual status. They can be chosen to provide information on risks related to the deliverables, such as 
performance, as well as on project-related features, such as time and cost. 
9.3.3 Tracking Overall Risk 
Tools are required in order to determine, as the project progresses, whether the responses are having the 
expected effect on the project’s overall level of risk. 
9.3.4 Tracking Compliance 
In order to monitor the quality of the execution of the risk-related plans and processes, a set of quality 
metrics such as degree of variation from the baseline, should be tracked and recorded. These metrics will 
normally have been defi ned in the risk management plan. 
9.4 Documenting the Results of the Monitor and Control Risks Process 
The fi nal control action of risk monitoring and controlling is to record actual data for future use. This includes 
all of the relevant information relating to risk management from start to fi nish of the project. The defi nition of 
what this information must include, as well as the storage mechanism, should have been previously specifi ed 
in the risk management plan. 
The goal is to ensure that the signifi cant risk management information is recorded to provide concrete data 
to the lessons learned process for inclusion in a lessons learned document, report, or other communication 
vehicle. Typical information includes the following: 
For each identifi ed risk or type of risk, whether it occurred, and, if so, when and how often. All 
• 
relevant data should be recorded: impact, effectiveness of detection and of response, and any 
unplanned, additional actions that were carried out. 
Effectiveness of avoidance or exploitation actions. 
• 
Effectiveness of transfer and sharing actions. 
• 
Unexpected or undocumented risks which occurred and data about them. 
• 
Effectiveness of risk mitigation and enhancement actions. 
• 
Occurrence of accepted threats or opportunities. 
• 
Consolidated information should be provided on the level of effort expended. Costs and benefi ts to the 
project of risk management activities should also be provided. 
This information will need to be archived and indexed in a manner that will facilitate retrieval for easy 
review during the project, at closure, and for future projects, when the need arises. 